<doc id="1" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1" title="April">
April

April is the fourth month of the year, and comes between March and May. It has 30 days. April begins on the same day of week as July in all years and also January in leap years.
April's flowers are the Sweet Pea and Daisy. Its birthstone is the diamond. The meaning of the diamond is innocence.
The Month.
April comes between March and May, making it the fourth month of the year. It also comes first in the year out of the four months that have 30 days, as June, September and November are later in the year. It starts on the same day of the week as July every year, and starts on the same day as January in leap years. In a common year, April starts on the same day of the week as October of the previous year, and in leap years starts on the same day as May of the previous year.
April ends on the same day of the week as December every year. In a common year, it ends on the same day as July of the previous year. In a leap year, it ends on the same day as October of the previous year.
April is a spring month in the Northern Hemisphere and an autumn/fall month in the Southern Hemisphere. In each hemisphere, it is the seasonal equivalent of October in the other.
It is unclear as to where April got its name. A common theory is that it comes from the Latin word "aperire", meaning "to open", referring to flowers opening in spring. Another theory is that the name could come from Aphrodite, the Greek goddess of love. It was originally the second month in the old Roman Calendar, before the start of the new year was put to January 1.
Quite a few festivals are held in this month. In many Southeast Asian cultures, new year is celebrated in this month (including Songkran). In Western Christianity, Easter can be celebrated on a Sunday between March 22 and April 25. In Orthodox Christianity, it can fall between April 4 and May 8. At the end of the month, Central and Northern European cultures celebrate Walpurgis Night on April 30, marking the transition from winter into summer.
April in poetry.
Poets use "April" to mean the end of winter. For example: "April showers bring May flowers."

</doc>
<doc id="2" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2" title="August">
August

August is the eighth month of the year in the Gregorian calendar, coming between July and September. It has 31 days, the same number of days as the previous month, July, and is named after Roman Emperor Augustus Caesar.
The Month.
This month was first called "Sextilis" in Latin, because it was the sixth month in the old Roman calendar. The Roman calendar began in March about 735 BC with Romulus. October was the eighth month. August was the eighth month when January or February were added to the start of the year by King Numa Pompilius about 700 BC. Or, when those two months were moved from the end to the beginning of the year by the decemvirs about 450 BC (Roman writers disagree). In 153 BC January 1 was determined as the beginning of the year.
August is named for Augustus Caesar who became Roman consul in this month. The month has 31 days because Julius Caesar added two days when he created the Julian calendar in 45 BC. August is after July and before September.
August, in either hemisphere, is the seasonal equivalent of February in the other. In the Northern hemisphere it is a summer month and it is a winter month in the Southern hemisphere. In a common year, no other month begins on the same day of the week as August, though in leap years, February starts on the same day as August. August always ends on the same day of the week as November.
August's flower is the Gladiolus with the birthstone being peridot. The astrological signs for August are Leo (July 24 - August 22) and Virgo (August 23 - September 23).

</doc>
<doc id="6" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6" title="Art">
Art

Art is an activity or creation by people that has importance because of an attraction to the human senses. Art is made when a human expresses himself or herself. Some art is useful in a practical sense, such as a sculptured clay bowl that one can put things in. Many people disagree on how to define art. Many people say people are driven to make art due to their inner creativity. Art includes drawing, painting, sculpting, photography, performance art, dance, music, poetry, prose and theatre.
Types of art.
Art is divided into the plastic arts, where something is made, and the performing arts, where something is done by humans in action. The other division is between pure arts, done for themselves, and practical arts, done for a practical purpose, but with artistic content.
What "art" means.
Some people say that art is a product or item that is made with the intention of stimulating the human senses as well as the human mind or spirit.
An artwork is normally judged by how much impact it has on people, the amount of people who can relate to it, and how much people appreciate it.
The first and broadest sense of "art" means "arrangement" or "to arrange." In this sense, art is created when someone arranges things found in the world into a new or different design or form; or when someone arranges colors next to each other in a painting to make an image or just to make a pretty or interesting design.
Art can also be a form of expression of emotion. The artist may feel a certain emotion and feels there is no other way to express it than to create something that means something to them. Most of the art created in this case is made for the artist rather than an audience. Though if an audience is able to connect with the emotion as well, then the art work will become publicly successful.
History of art.
There are sculptures, cave painting and rock art dating from the Upper Paleolithic era.
All of the great ancient civilizations, such as Ancient Egypt, India, China, Greece, Rome or Arabia had works and styles of art. In the Middle Ages, most of the art in Europe showed people from the Bible in paintings, stained glass windows, and mosaic tile floors and walls.
Islamic art includes geometric patterns, Islamic calligraphy, and architecture. In India and Tibet, painted sculptures, dance, and religious painting were done. In China, arts included jade carving, bronzework, pottery, poetry, calligraphy, music, painting, drama, and fiction. There are many Chinese artistic styles, which are usually named after the ruling dynasty.
In Europe, after the Middle Ages, there was a "Renaissance" which means "rebirth". People rediscovered science and artists were allowed to paint subjects other than religious subjects. People like Michelangelo and Leonardo da Vinci still painted religious pictures, but they also now could paint mythological pictures too. These artists also invented perspective where things in the distance look smaller than things close up in the picture. This was new because in the Middle Ages people would paint all the figures close up and just overlapping each other.
In the late 1800s, artists in Europe, responding to Modernity created many new painting styles such as Classicism, Romanticism, Realism, and Impressionism. The history of twentieth century art includes Expressionism, Fauvism, Cubism, Dadaism, Surrealism, and Minimalism.
Roles of art.
In some societies, people think that art belongs to the person who made it, such as Indigenous Aboriginal Australian Art. They think that the artist put his or her "talent" into the art. In this view, the art is the property of the artist.
In other societies, people think that art belongs to no one. They think that society has put its social capital into the artist and the artist's work. In this view, society is a collective that has made the art, through the artist.
Functions of art.
The functions of art include:
1) Cognitive function
2) Aesthetic function
3) Prognostic function
4) Recreation function
5) Value function
6) Didactic function

</doc>
<doc id="8" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8" title="A">
A

Template codice_1 has been incorrectly substituted.
A is the first letter of the English alphabet. The small letter, a, is used as a lower case vowel. However, the English long a (ā) is said as a diphthong of ĕ and y. The same letter of the Greek alphabet is named alpha. Alpha and omega, the last letter of the Greek alphabet, means the beginning and the end. In musical notation, the letter A is the symbol of a note in the scale, below B and above G. In binary numbers, the letter A is 01000001.
A is the letter that was used to represent a team in an old TV show, The A-Team.
Where it came from.
The earliest the letter 'A' has appeared was in the Phoenician alphabet's aleph. This symbol came from a simple picture of an ox head. 
This Phoenician letter helped make the basic blocks of later types of the letter. The Greeks later modified this letter and used it as their letter alpha. The Greek alphabet was used by the Etruscans in northern Italy, and the Romans later modified the Etruscan alphabet for their own language.
Using the letter.
The letter A has six different sounds. It can sound like æ, in the International Phonetic Alphabet, such as the word "pad". Other sounds of this letter are in the words "father", which developed into another sound, such as in the word "ace".
Use in mathematics.
In algebra, the letter "A" along with other letters at the beginning of the alphabet is used to represent known quantities.
In geometry, capital A, B, C etc. are used to label line segments, lines, etc. Also, A is typically used as one of the letters to label an angle in a triangle

</doc>
<doc id="9" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9" title="Air">
Air

Air is one of the four classical elements – air, water, earth, and fire
Air is the Earth's atmosphere. Air around us is a mixture of many gases and dust particles. It is the clear gas in which living things live and breathe. It has an indefinite shape and volume. It has no color or smell. It has mass and weight. It is a matter as it has mass and weight. Air creates atmosphere pressure. There is no air in the vacuum and cosmos. 
Air is a mixture of 78.09% nitrogen, 20.95% oxygen, 0.93% argon, 0.039% carbon dioxide, and small amounts of other gases. There is an average of about 1% water vapour.
Animals need the oxygen in the air to live. In the human body, the lungs give oxygen to the blood, and give back carbon dioxide to the air. Plants need the carbon dioxide in the air to live. They give off oxygen that humans can breathe again. 
Wind is moving air. Air can be polluted by some gases (such as ozone and carbon monoxide), smoke, and ash. This pollution is one of the reasons for global warming, by causing the "greenhouse effect".
Aircraft use propellers to move air over a wing, which allows them to fly.
References.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="12" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12" title="Autonomous communities of Spain">
Autonomous communities of Spain

Spain is divided in 17 parts called autonomous communities. "Autonomous" means that each of these autonomous communities has its own Executive Power, its own Legislative Power and its own Judicial Power. These are similar, but NOT the same, to states in the United States of America, for example.
Spain has fifty smaller parts called provinces. In 1978 these parts came together, making the autonomous communities. 
Before then, some of these provinces were together but were broken. The groups that were together once before are called "historic communities": Catalonia, Basque Country, Galicia and Andalusia.
The Spanish language is the official language in every autonomous commmunity but six, which also have other official languages:
List of the autonomous communities, with their Capital city (the place where the government has its offices):
Spain also has two cities on the north coast of Africa: Ceuta and Melilla. They are called "autonomous cities" and have simultaneously the majority of the power of an autonomous community and also power of provinces and power of municipalities.

</doc>
<doc id="13" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13" title="Alan Turing">
Alan Turing

Alan Mathison Turing OBE FRS (London, 23 June 1912 – Wilmslow, Cheshire, 7 June 1954) was an English mathematician and computer scientist. He was born in Maida Vale, London.
Career.
Turing was one of the people who worked on the first computers. He was the first person to think of using a computer to do things that were too hard for a person to do. He created the Turing machine in 1936. The machine was imaginary, but it included the idea of a computer program. 
Turing was interested in artificial intelligence. He proposed the Turing test, to say when a machine could be called "intelligent". A computer could be said to "think" if a human talking with it could not tell it was a machine.
During World War II, Turing worked to break German ciphers (secret messages). Using cryptanalysis he helped to break the codes of the Enigma machine. After that, he solved other German codes.
From 1945 to 1947, Turing worked on the design of the ACE (Automatic Computing Engine) at the National Physical Laboratory. He presented a paper on 19 February 1946. That paper was "the first detailed design of a stored-program computer". Although it was possible to build ACE, there were delays in starting the project. In late 1947 he returned to Cambridge for a sabbatical year. While he was at Cambridge, the Pilot ACE was built without him. It ran its first program on 10 May 1950.
Private life.
Turing was a homosexual man. In 1952, he admitted having had sex with a man in England. At that time, homosexual acts were illegal. Turing was convicted. He had to choose between going to jail and taking hormones to lower his sex drive. He decided to take the hormones. After his punishment, he became impotent. He also grew breasts.
In May 2012, a private member's bill was put before the House of Lords to grant Turing a statutory pardon. In July 2013, the government supported it. A royal pardon was granted on 24 December 2013.
Death.
In 1954, after suffering for two years, Turing died from cyanide poisoning. The cyanide came from either an apple which was poisoned with cyanide, or from water that had cyanide in it. The reason for the confusion is that the police never tested the apple for cyanide. 
The treatment forced on him is now believed to be very wrong. It is against medical ethics and international laws of human rights. In August 2009, a petition asking the British Government to apologise to Turing for punishing him for being a homosexual was started. The petition received thousands of signatures. Prime Minister Gordon Brown acknowledged the petition. He called Turing's treatment "appalling".

</doc>
<doc id="14" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14" title="Alanis Morissette">
Alanis Morissette

Alanis Nadine Morissette (born 1 June 1974) is a Grammy Award-winning Canadian-American singer and songwriter. She was born in Ottawa, Canada. She began singing in Canada as a teenager in 1990. In 1995, she became popular all over the world.
As a young child in Canada, Morissette began to act on television, including 5 episodes of the long-running series, "You Can't Do That on Television". Her first album was released only in Canada in 1990.
Her first international album was "Jagged Little Pill", released in 1995. It was a rock-influenced album. "Jagged" has sold more than 33 million units globally. It became the best-selling debut album in music history. Her next album, "Supposed Former Infatuation Junkie", was released in 1998. It was a success as well. Morissette took up producing duties for her next albums, which include "Under Rug Swept", "So-Called Chaos" and "Flavors of Entanglement". Morissette has sold more than 60 million albums worldwide.
She also acted in several movies, including Kevin Smith's "Dogma", where she played God.
About her life.
Alanis Morissette's father is French-Canadian. Her mother is from Hungary. She has an older brother, Chad, and a twin brother, Wade, who is 12 minutes younger than she is. Her parents had worked as teachers at a military base in Lahr, Germany.
Morissette became an American citizen in 2005. She is still Canadian citizen.
On May 22, 2010, Morissette married rapper Mario “MC Souleye” Treadway.
Jagged Little Pill.
Morissette has had many albums. Her 1995 album "Jagged Little Pill" became a very popular album. It has sold over 30 million copies worldwide. The album caused Morissette to win four Grammy Awards. The album "Jagged Little Pill" touched many people.
On the album, Morissette sang songs about many different things. These things include:
Discography.
Selected songs.
Morissette has written many songs. Some of her most famous songs are:

</doc>
<doc id="17" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17" title="Adobe Illustrator">
Adobe Illustrator

Adobe Illustrator is a computer program for making graphic design and illustrations. It is made by Adobe Systems. Pictures created in "Adobe Illustrator" can be made bigger or smaller, and look exactly the same at any size. It works well with the rest of the products with the Adobe name.
History.
It was first released in 1986 for the Apple Macintosh. The latest version is Adobe Illustrator CS6, part of Creative Suite 6.
References.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="18" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18" title="Andouille">
Andouille

Andouille is a type of pork sausage. It is spicy (hot in taste) and smoked. There are different kinds, all with different combinations of pork meat, fat, intestines (tubes going to the stomach), and tripe (the wall of the stomach). Andouille sausage first came from France or Germany (no-one is sure), but the name indicates that it may have come out from France, and the most famous sort in the USA is the "Cajun" style. 
Other sorts are "French andouille" and "German andouille"; they are less spicy than Cajun. Cajun has extra salt, black pepper, and garlic. Andouille makers smoke the sausages over pecan wood and sugar cane for a maximum of seven or eight hours, at about 175 degrees Fahrenheit (80 degrees Celsius).
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="19" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19" title="Farming">
Farming

Farming is growing crops or keeping animals by people for food and raw materials. Farming is a part of agriculture.
History.
Agriculture started at least 10,000 years ago, but no one knows for sure how old it is. The development of farming gave rise to the Neolithic Revolution whereby people gave up nomadic hunting and settled in what became cities.
Agriculture and domestication probably started in the Fertile Crescent (the Nile Valley, The Levant and Mesopotamia). The area called Fertile Crescent is now in the countries of Iraq, Syria, Turkey, Jordan, Lebanon, Israel, and Egypt. Wheat and barley are some of the first crops people grew. People probably started agriculture slowly by planting a few crops, but still gathered many foods from the wild. People may have started farming because the weather and soil began to change. Farming can feed many more people than hunter-gatherers can feed on the same amount of land.
Overview.
Agriculture is not only growing food for people and animals, but also growing other things like flowers and nursery plants, manure or dung, animal hides (skins or furs), leather, animals, fungi, fibers (cotton, wool, hemp, and flax), biofuels , and drugs (biopharmaceuticals, marijuana, opium)
Many people live by doing what is called subsistence agriculture, on a small farm. Only the farmer's family lives on the farm. Subsistence agriculture is growing only enough food to feed the farmer, his family, and his animals. Extra food or animals are sold for money or other things the farmer cannot grow. The yield is the amount of food grown on a given amount of land, and it is often low. This is because subsistence farmers are generally less educated, and they have less money to buy equipment. Drought and other problems sometimes cause famines. Where yields are low, forests are sometimes cut to provide new land to grow more food. This is good in the short term, but can be bad for the country and the surrounding environment over many years.
In rich countries, farms are often much larger. The yield on farms has got bigger in the last one hundred years because farmers are able to grow better varieties of plants, use more fertilizer, use more water, and more easily control weeds and pests. Many farms also use machines, which cut down on the number of people needed to farm the land. There are fewer farmers in rich countries, but the farmers are able to grow more. 
This kind of intensive agriculture comes with its own set of problems. Farmers use a lot of chemical fertilizers, pesticides (chemicals that kill bugs), and herbicides (chemicals that kill weeds). These chemicals can pollute the soil or the water. They can also create bugs and weeds that are more resistant to the chemicals, causing outbreaks of these pests. The soil can be damaged by erosion (blowing or washing away), salt buildup, or loss of structure. Irrigation (adding water from rivers) can pollute water and lower the water table. These problems have all got solutions, and modern young farmers usually have a good technical education.
Agriculture techniques.
Farmers select plants with better yield, taste, and nutritional value. They also choose plants that are more resistant to disease, more tolerant to drought, and easier to harvest. Centuries of careful selection and breeding have had enormous effects on the characteristics of crop plants. The crops produce better yield with other techniques (use of fertilizers, chemical pest control, irrigation).
Some companies have been searching for new plants in poor countries, and genetically modify these plants to improve them. They then try to patent the seeds and sell them back to the poor countries.
New plants were created with genetic engineering. One example of genetic engineering is modifying a plant to resist a herbicide.
Food.
It is important for there to be enough food for everyone. The food must also be safe and good. They say it is sometimes not safe, because it contains some chemicals. Other people say intensive agriculture is damaging the environment. For this reason, there are several types of agriculture.
Traditional agriculture is mostly done in poor countries.
Intensive agriculture is mostly done in wealthier countries. It uses pesticides, machinery, chemical fertilizers. Organic farming is using only natural products. Integrated farming is using local resources, and trying to use the waste from one process as a resource in another process.
Agricultural policy focuses on the goals and methods of agricultural production. At the policy level, common goals of agriculture include:
Problems in agriculture.
There are some serious problems that people face trying to grow food today.
These include:
Crops.
The major crops produced in the world in 2002, are maize (corn), wheat, rice, and cotton.
"See also": List of vegetables, List of herbs, List of fruit

</doc>
<doc id="21" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21" title="Arithmetic">
Arithmetic

Arithmetic is a name for working with numbers. It is a part of mathematics. The four basic arithmetic operations are addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division.
Harder arithmetic includes working with signed numbers, fractions, and decimals, and taking powers and roots.
Most people learn arithmetic in primary school, but some people do not learn arithmetic and others forget the arithmetic they learned. Many jobs require a knowledge of arithmetic, and many employers complain that it is hard to find people who know enough arithmetic. A few of the many jobs that require arithmetic include carpenters, plumbers, auto mechanics, accountants, architects, doctors, and nurses. Arithmetic is needed in all areas of mathematics, science, and engineering. 
A calculator can be used to do arithmetic. Computers can do it more quickly, which is one reason Global Positioning System receivers have a small computer inside. 
Examples of arithmetic.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="22" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22" title="Addition">
Addition

"Add" redirects here. For other articles with the same name, see ADD.
Addition is the mathematical way of putting things together.
Arithmetic.
In arithmetic, addition is finding the total of two or more numbers. The sign for addition is "+". The name for the sign "+" is "plus". 
Another name for the total is the sum.
Counting examples.
For example, there are objects in two groups. The objects are small circles: "o". One group has five of these objects. The other group has 3 of these objects. To find the total number of objects in both groups, the objects can be counted. Another way to find the number of objects in both groups is to add the numbers in each group. 
Adding.
Another method is to add the numbers of objects in group A and group B, since they are already counted. In symbols:
There are rules for adding numbers that people learn. There are also rules for adding numbers that are built into machines (binary adder). The rule says that:
In another counting example, Sally and Bill have 2 children. Sally and Bill get 3 more children. Sally and Bill have added three children to their two children and now have five children.
Vertical Addition
The animation above demonstrates the addition of seven hundred and eighty six and four hundred and sixty seven, the problems digits have been separated into units, tens and hundreds (place value). First the units 6 and 7 are added together to make 13, so 1 ten and 3 units, the 3 is written below and the 1 ten is carried to the tens column. Next in the tens column the 1, 8 and 6 are added together to make 15 tens, so 1 hundred and 5 tens, the 5 is written below and the 1 hundred is carried to the hundreds column. Finally in the hundreds column 1, 7 and 4 are added together to make 12 hundreds, so 1 thousand and 2 hundreds, the 2 is written below and the 1 thousand is carried to the thousand column. Giving the answer one thousand two hundred and fifty three.
A measurement example.
Tom wants to know the distance between his house and Sally's house. Bob's house is 300 meters east of Tom's house. Sally's house is 120 meters east of Bob's house:
The distance from Tom's house to Sally's house can be found by adding the distances already measured. The distance from Tom's house to Bob's house added to the distance from Bob's house to Sally's house is the same as the distance from Tom's house to Sally's house. That is, three hundred (300) meters plus 120 meters.
Addition as increase.
Addition can also mean to make bigger.

</doc>
<doc id="27" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27" title="Australia">
Australia

Australia is a country in the Southern hemisphere between the Pacific Ocean and the Indian Ocean. Its official name is the Commonwealth of Australia. Australia is the sixth biggest country in the world by landmass, and is part of the Oceanic and Australasian regions. The Australian emblem is a flower called the Golden Wattle. 
23–24 million people live in Australia, and about 80% of them live on the east coast. About 60% live in and around the mainland state capitals of Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Perth and Adelaide. Australia's capital city is Canberra.
Australia is known for its mining and for its production of wool. Australia is the world's largest producer of bauxite.
Australia, New Zealand, New Guinea and other islands on the Australian tectonic plate are together called Australasia. They form one of the world's great ecozones. When other Pacific islands are included, the term is Oceania.
Geography.
Australia's landmass of 7,617,930 square kilometers is on the Indo-Australian plate.
The continent of Australia, including the island of Tasmania, was separated from the other continents of the world many millions of years ago Because of this, many animals and plants live in Australia that do not live anywhere else. These include animals like the kangaroo, the koala, the emu, the kookaburra, and the platypus.
People first arrived in Australia more than 50,000 years ago. These native Australians are called the Australian Aborigines. For the history of Australia, see History of Australia.
Most of the Australian colonies, having been settled from Britain, became mostly independent democratic states in the 1850s and all six combined as a federation on 1 January 1901. The first Prime Minister of Australia was Edmund Barton in 1901. Australia is a member of the United Nations and the Commonwealth of Nations. It is a parliamentary democracy and a constitutional monarchy with Elizabeth II as Queen of Australia and Head of State and a Governor-General who is chosen by the Prime Minister to carry out all the duties of the Queen in Australia.
Regions and cities.
Australia has six states, two major mainland territories, and other minor territories. The states are New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia, Tasmania, Victoria, and Western Australia. The two major mainland territories are the Northern Territory and the Australian Capital Territory (ACT).
In 2013 according to world bank Australia had just over 23.13 million people. Most Australians live in cities along the coast, such as Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Perth, Darwin, Hobart and Adelaide. The largest inland city is Canberra, which is also the nation's capital. The largest city is Sydney.
Australia is a very big country, but much of the land is very dry, and the middle of the continent is mostly desert. Only the areas around the east, west and south coast have enough rain and a suitable climate (not too hot) for many farms and cities.
History.
Aboriginal people.
The Australian Aboriginal people arrived in Australia more than 50,000 years ago. Until the arrival of British settlers in 1788, the Aboriginal people lived by hunting and gathering food from the land. They lived in all sorts of climates and managed the land in different ways. An example of Aboriginal land management was the Cumberland Plain where Sydney is now. Every few years the Aboriginal people would burn the grass and small trees. This meant that a lot of grass grew back, but not many big trees. Kangaroos like to live on grassy plains, but not in forests. The kangaroos that lived on the plain were a good food supply for the Aboriginal people. Sometimes, Aborigines would name a person after an animal, and they could not eat that animal to help level out the food population.
Aboriginal people did not usually build houses, except huts of grass, leaves and bark. They did not usually build walls or fences, and there were no horses, cows or sheep in Australia that needed to be kept in pens. The only Aboriginal buildings that are known are fish-traps made from stones piled up in the river, and the remains of a few stone huts in Victoria and Tasmania. The Aboriginal people did not use metal or make pottery or use bows and arrows or weave cloth. In some parts of Australia the people used sharp flaked-stone spearheads, but most Aboriginal spears were made of sharply pointed wood. Australia has a lot of trees that have very hard wood that was good for spear making. The boomerang was used in some areas for sport and for hunting.
The Aboriginal people did not think that the land belonged to them. They believed that they had grown from the land, so it was like their mother, and they belonged to the land.
Terra Australis.
In the 1600s, Dutch merchants traded with the islands of Batavia (now Indonesia), to the north of Australia and several different Dutch ships touched on the coast of Australia. The Dutch Governor, van Diemen, sent Abel Tasman on a voyage of discovery and he found Tasmania, which he named Van Diemen's Land. Its name was later changed to honour the man who discovered it.
The British Government were sure that there must be a very large land in the south, that had not been explored. They sent Captain James Cook to the Pacific Ocean. His ship, "HMS Endeavour", carried the famous scientists, Sir Joseph Banks and Dr Solander who were going to Tahiti where they would watch the planet Venus pass in front of the Sun. Captain Cook's secret mission was to find "Terra Australis" (the Land of the South).
The voyage of discovery was very successful, because they found New Zealand and sailed right around it. Then they sailed westward. At last, a boy, William Hicks, who was up the mast spotted land on the horizon. Captain Cook named that bit of land Point Hicks. They sailed up the coast and Captain Cook named the land that he saw "New South Wales". At last they sailed into a large open bay which was full of fish and stingrays which the sailors speared for food. Joseph Banks and Dr. Solander went ashore and were astonished to find that they did not know what any of the plants or birds or animals that they saw were. They collected hundreds of plants to take back to England.
Captain Cook saw the Aboriginal people with their simple way of life. He saw them fishing and hunting and collecting grass seeds and fruit. But there were no houses and no fences. In most parts of the world, people put up a house and a fence or some marker to show that they own the land. But the Aboriginal people did not own the land in that way. They belonged to the land, like a baby belongs to its mother. Captain Cook went home to England and told the Government that no-one owned the land. This would later cause a terrible problem for the Aboriginal people.
Settlement.
In the 1700s, in England, laws were tough, many people were poor and gaols (jails) were full. A person could be sentenced to death for stealing a loaf of bread. Many people were hanged for small crimes. But usually they were just thrown in gaol. Often they were sent away to the British Colonies in America. But in the 1770s, the colonies in America became the United States. They were free from British rule and would not take England's convicts any more.
By the 1780s the gaols of England were so full that convicts were often chained up in rotting old ships. The Government decided to make a settlement in New South Wales and send some of the convicts there. In 1788 the First Fleet of eleven ships set sail from Portsmouth carrying convicts, sailors, marines, a few free settlers and enough food to last for two years. Their leader was Captain Arthur Phillip. They were to make a new colony at the place that Captain Cook had discovered, named Botany Bay because of all the unknown plants found there by the two scientists.
Captain Phillip found that Botany Bay was flat and windy. There was not much fresh water. He went with two ships up the coast and sailed into a great harbour which he said was "the finest harbour in the world!" There were many small bays on the harbour so he decided on one which had a good stream of fresh water and some flat shore to land on. On the 26th January, 1788, the flag was raised and New South Wales was claimed in the name of King George III of England, and the new settlement was called Sydney.
For the first few years of the settlement, things were very difficult. No-one in the British Government had thought very hard about what sort of convicts should be sent to make a new colony. Nobody had chosen them carefully. There was only one man who was a farmer. There was no-one among the convicts who was a builder, a brickmaker or a blacksmith. No-one knew how to fix the tools when they broke. The cattle all escaped. There were no cooking pots. All the plants were different so no-one knew which ones could be eaten. There was a grave danger that everyone in the new colony would die of starvation.
Somehow, the little group of tents with a hut for the Governor, Arthur Phillip, and another hut for the supply of food, grew into a small town with streets, a bridge over the stream, a windmill for grinding grain and wharves for ships. By the 1820s there was a fine brick house for the Governor. There was also a hospital and a convict barracks and a beautiful church which are still standing today. Settlements had spread out from Sydney, firstly to Norfolk Island and to Van Diemen's Land (Tasmania), and also up the coast to Newcastle, where coal was discovered, and inland where the missing cattle were found to have grown to a large herd. Spanish Merino sheep had been brought to Sydney, and by 1820, farmers were raising fat lambs for meat and also sending fine wool back to the factories of England.
While the settlement was growing in New South Wales, it was also growing in Tasmania. The climate in Tasmania was more like that in England, and farmers found it easy to grow crops there.
Exploration.
Because Australia is such a very large land, it was easy to think that it might be able to hold a very large number of people. In the early days of the colony, a great number of explorers went out, searching for good land to settle on.
When the settlers looked west from Sydney, they saw a range of mountains which they called the Blue Mountains. They were not very high and did not look very rugged but for many years no-one could find their way through them. In 1813 Gregory Blaxland, William Lawson and a 17 year-old called William Charles Wentworth crossed the Blue Mountains and found land on the other side which was good for farming. A road was built and the Governor, Lachlan Macquarie founded the town of Bathurst on the other side, 100 miles from Sydney.
Some people, like Captain Charles Sturt were sure that there must be a sea in the middle of Australia and set out to find it. Many of the explorers did not prepare very well, or else they went out to explore at the hottest time of year. Some died like Burke and Wills. Ludwig Leichhardt got lost twice. The second time, he was never seen again. Major Thomas Mitchell was one of the most successful explorers. He mapped the country as he went, and his maps remained in use for more than 100 years. He travelled all the way to what is now western Victoria, and to his surprise and annoyance found that he was not the first white person there. The Henty brothers had come from Tasmania, had built themselves a house, had a successful farm and fed the Major and his men on roast lamb and wine.
Self government.
The goldrushes of New South Wales and Victoria started in 1851 leading to large numbers of people arriving to search for gold. The population grew across south east Australia and made great wealth and industry. By 1853 the goldrushes had made some poor people, very rich.
The transportation of convicts to Australia ended in the 1840s and 1850s and more changes came. The people in Australia wanted to run their own country, and not be told what to do from London. The first governments in the colonies were run by Governors chosen by London. Soon the settlers wanted local government and more democracy. William Wentworth started the Australian Patriotic Association (Australia's first political party) in 1835 to demand democratic government. In 1840, the city councils started and some people could vote. New South Wales Legislative Council had its first elections in 1843, again with some limits on who could vote. In 1855, limited self-government was given by London to New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania. In 1855, the right to vote was given to all men over 21 in South Australia. The other colonies soon followed. Women were given the vote in the Parliament of South Australia in 1895 and they became the first women in the world allowed to stand in elections.
Australians had started parliamentary democracries all across the continent. But voices were getting louder for all of them to come together as one country with a national parliament.
The Commonwealth of Australia.
Until 1901, Australia was not a nation, it was six separate colonies governed by Britain. They voted to join together to form one new country, called the Commonwealth of Australia, in 1901. Australia was still part of the British Empire, and at first wanted only British or Europeans to come to Australia. But soon it had its own money, and its own Army and Navy.
In Australia at this time, the trade unions were very strong, and they started a political party, the Australian Labor Party. Australia passed many laws to help the workers.
In 1914, the First World War started in Europe. Australia joined in on the side of Britain against Germany, Austria-Hungary and Turkey. Australian soldiers were sent to Gallipoli, in Turkey. They fought bravely, but were beaten by the Turks. Today Australia remembers this battle every year on ANZAC Day. They also fought on the Western Front. More than 60,000 Australians were killed.
Australia had a really hard time in the Great Depression of the 1930s and joined Britain in a war against Nazi Germany when Hitler invaded Poland in 1939. But in 1941 lots of Australian soldiers were captured in the Fall of Singapore by Japan. Then Japan started attacking Australia and people worried about invasion. But with help from the United States Navy, the Japanese were stopped. After the war, Australia became a close friend of the United States.
When the war ended, Australia felt that it needed many more people to fill the country up and to work. So the government said it would take in people from Europe who had lost their homes in the war. It did things like build the Snowy Mountains Scheme. Over the next 25 years, millions of people came to Australia. They came especially from Italy and Greece, other countries in Europe. Later they also came from countries like Turkey and Lebanon. An important new party, the Liberal Party of Australia was made by Robert Menzies in 1944 and it won lots of elections from 1949 until in 1972, then Gough Whitlam won for the Labor Party. Whitlam made changes, but he made the Senate unhappy and the Governor-General sacked him and forced an election in 1975. Then Malcolm Fraser won a few elections for the Liberal Party.
In the 1960s many people began coming to Australia from China, Vietnam, Malaysia and other countries in Asia. Australia became more multicultural. In the 1950s and 1960s Australia became one of the richest countries in the world, helped by mining and wool. Australia started trading more with America, then Japan. Australia supported the United States in wars against dictatorships in Korea and Vietnam and later Iraq. Australian soldiers also helped the United Nations in countries like East Timor in 1999.
In 1973, the famous Sydney Opera House opened. In the 1970s, 80s and 90s lots of Australian movies, actors and singers became famous around the world. In the year 2000, Sydney had the Summer Olympics.
In the 1980s and 90s, the Labor Party under Bob Hawke and Paul Keating, then the Liberal Party under John Howard made lots of changes to the economy. Australia had a bad recession in 1991, but when other Western countries had trouble with their economies in 2008, Australia stayed strong.
Today Australia is a rich, peaceful and democratic country. But it still has problems. Around 4-5% of Australians could not get a job in 2010. A lot of land in Australia (like Uluru) has been returned to Aboriginal people, but lots of Aborigines are still poorer than everybody else. Every year the government chooses a big number of new people from all around the world to come as immigrants to live in Australia. These people may come because they want to do business, or to live in a democracy, to join their family, or because they are refugees. Australia took 6.5 million immigrants in the 60 years after World War Two, including around 660,000 refugees.
Julia Gillard became the first woman Prime Minister of Australia in 2010 when she replaced her colleague Kevin Rudd of the Labor Party.
Politics.
Australia is made up of six states and three mainland territories. Each state and territory has its own Parliament and makes its own local laws. The Parliament of Australia sits in Canberra and makes laws for the whole country, also known as the Commonwealth or Federation.
The Federal government is led by the Prime Minister of Australia, who is the member of Parliament chosen as leader. The current Prime Minister is Malcolm Turnbull.
The leader of Australia is the Prime Minister, although the Governor-General represents the Queen of Australia, who is also the Queen of Great Britain, as head of state. The Governor-General, currently, Her Excellency Ms Quentin Bryce, is chosen by the Prime Minister.
Culture.
Australia was colonised by people from Britain, but today people from all over the world live there. English is the main spoken language, and Christianity is the main religion though all religions are accepted and not everybody has a religion. Australia is multicultural, which means that all its people are helped to keep their different languages, religions and ways of life, while also learning English and joining in with other Australians.
Famous Australian writers include the bush balladeers Banjo Paterson and Henry Lawson who wrote about life in the Australian bush. More modern famous writers include Peter Carey, Thomas Keneally and Colleen McCullough. In 1973, Patrick White won the Nobel Prize in Literature, the only Australian to have achieved this; he is seen as one of the great English-language writers of the twentieth century.
Australian music has had lots of world-wide stars, for example the opera singers Nellie Melba and Joan Sutherland, the rock and roll bands Bee Gees, AC/DC and INXS, the folk-rocker Paul Kelly (musician), the pop singer Kylie Minogue and Australian country music stars Slim Dusty and John Williamson. Australian Aboriginal music is very special and very ancient: it has the famous digeridoo woodwind instrument. 
Australian TV has produced many successful programs for home and overseas - including Skippy the Bush Kangaroo, Home and Away and Neighbours - and produced such well known TV stars as Barry Humphries ("Dame Edna Everage"), Steve Irwin ("The Crocodile Hunter") and The Wiggles. Major Australian subgroups such as the Bogan have been shown on Australian TV in shows such as Bogan Hunters and Kath & Kim.
Australia has two public broadcasters (the ABC and the multi-cultural SBS), three commercial television networks, three pay-TV services, and numerous public, non-profit television and radio stations. Each major city has its daily newspapers, and there are two national daily newspapers, The Australian and The Australian Financial Review.
Australian movies have a very long history. The world's first feature movie was the Australian movie "The Story of the Kelly Gang" of 1906. In 1933, "In the Wake of the Bounty", directed by Charles Chauvel, had Errol Flynn as the main actor. Flynn went on to a celebrated career in Hollywood. The first Australian Oscar was won by 1942's "Kokoda Front Line!", directed by Ken G. Hall. In the 1970s and 1980s lots of big Australian movies and movie stars became world famous with movies like "Picnic at Hanging Rock", "Gallipoli" (with Mel Gibson), "The Man From Snowy River" and "Crocodile Dundee". Russell Crowe, Cate Blanchett and Heath Ledger became global stars during the 1990s and "Australia" starring Nicole Kidman and Hugh Jackman made a lot of money in 2008.
Sport.
Sport is an important part of Australian culture because the climate is good for outdoor activities. 23.5% Australians over the age of 15 regularly take part in organised sporting activities. In international sports, Australia has very strong teams in cricket, hockey, netball, rugby league and rugby union, and performs well in cycling, rowing and swimming. Local popular sports include Australian Rules Football, horse racing, soccer and motor racing. Australia has participated in every summer Olympic Games since 1896, and every Commonwealth Games. Australia has hosted the 1956 and 2000 Summer Olympics, and has ranked in the top five medal-winners since 2000. Australia has also hosted the 1938, 1962, 1982 and 2006 Commonwealth Games and are to host the 2018 Commonwealth Games. Other major international events held regularly in Australia include the Australian Open, one of the four Grand Slam tennis tournaments, annual international cricket matches and the Formula One Australian Grand Prix. Corporate and government sponsorship of many sports and elite athletes is common in Australia. Televised sport is popular; some of the highest-rated television programs include the Summer Olympic Games and the grand finals of local and international football competitions.
The main sporting leagues for males are the Australian Football League, National Rugby League, A-League and NBL.
For women, they are ANZ Netball Championships, W-League and WNBL.
Famous Australian sports players include the cricketer Sir Donald Bradman, the swimmer Ian Thorpe and the athlete Cathy Freeman.
Art festivals.
Just 60 years ago, Australia had only one big Art festival. Now Australia has hundreds of smaller community-based festivals, and national and regional festivals that focus on specific art forms.
Wildlife.
Australia is home to many animals that can be found nowhere else on Earth, which include: the koala, the kangaroo, the wombat, the numbat, the emu, among many others...

</doc>
<doc id="28" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28" title="American English">
American English

American English or United States English is the dialect of English language spoken in the United States of America. It is different in some ways from other types of English, such as British English. Many types of American English came from local dialects in England.
Many people today know about American English even if they live in a country where another sort of English is spoken. This may be because people hear and read American English through the media, for example CNN television, and the Internet, where the most common form of English is American English.
Because people all over the world use American English as well as other types of English, the English language gets new words. Because of this, English has been changing for hundreds of years. For example, the English language spoken in India, which has more than one billion people, keeps adding more American English words to go along with its British English base and many other words from any of the 200+ Indian languages.
Sometimes people learn American English as it is spoken in America. For example, in telephone call centers in India and other places, people often learn American English to sound more like their customers who call from America. These people often keep using American English in everyday life.
The meaning of many words are different in American English. Most changes in a language start with small things. For example, Italian, Spanish, and French all came from Latin.
Spelling in American English.
There are many words that sound the same in both American English and British English, but are spelled differently. For example:
Words of that come from French that end in -re in British English (metre, centre) end in -er in American English. In these cases Canadian usage is to keep the British (and French) spelling.
Books show that many of these differences come from the writings of English-lover Noah Webster, who made the American dictionary following the American War of Independence.
Some more differences in American English:
There are also some words in American English that are a bit different from British English, e.g.:

</doc>
<doc id="30" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30" title="Aquaculture">
Aquaculture

Aquaculture is the farming of fish, shrimp, and algae, and other seafood. Aquaculture supplies fish, such as catfish, salmon, and trout. Aquaculture was developed a long time ago in China and aquaculture supplies over 20% of all the seafood harvested. 
Aquaculture is quite a new activity in Canada as it only began in 1879. 
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="32" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32" title="Abbreviation">
Abbreviation

An abbreviation is a shorter way to write a word or phrase. People use abbreviations for words that they write a lot. The English language occasionally uses the apostrophe mark ' to show that a word is written in a shorter way, but some abbreviations do not use this mark. More often, they use periods, especially the ones that come from the Latin language. Common Latin abbreviations include i.e. [id est] "that is", e.g. [exempli gratia] "for example", and et al. [et alia] "and others".
Some new abbreviations have been created by scientists, by workers in companies and governments, and by people using the Internet. 
People often think words are abbreviations when in fact they are acronyms.
Here are examples of common acronyms: The word "radar" is an acronym for "Radio Detection and Ranging". The name of the large computer company IBM comes from the words "International Business Machines". The name of the part of the United States government that sends rockets into outer space is NASA, from the words "National Aeronautics and Space Administration". When people using the Internet think that something is very funny, they sometimes write "LOL" to mean "Laughing Out Loud". People sometimes write "ASAP" for "As Soon As Possible".

</doc>
<doc id="33" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33" title="Angel">
Angel

For other uses, see Angel (disambiguation).
Template codice_1 has been incorrectly substituted.
In many mythologies and religions, an angel is a good spirit. The word angel comes from the Greek word "angelos" which means "messenger". Angels appear frequently in the Old Testament, the New Testament, Qur'an and Aqdas.
In the Bible.
Angels are powerful, smart spirits that obey God's commands and praise him with singing and they have male (masculine)gender, but without any sex. They sometimes appear to humans in human form. They can deliver messages to people in person or in dreams. Angels that are named in the Bible are Michael (called a "chief prince"), Gabriel (known for telling Mary that she would be the mother of Jesus), and Raphael (in the Apocryphal Book of Tobit). The Ethiopian Book of Enoch also lists four Archangels which watch over the four quadrants of heaven; Michael, Raphael, Gabriel and Uriel. Lucifer is also known as an angel in the Bible. 
Types.
Ezekiel 28:13-14
13. Thou hast been in Eden the garden of God; every precious stone was thy covering, the sardius, topaz, and the diamond, the beryl, the onyx, and the jasper, the sapphire, the emerald, and the carbuncle and gold: the workmanship of thy tabrets and of thy pipes was prepaired in thee in the day that thou wast created.
14. Thou art the anointed cherub that covereth; and I have set thee so: thou wast upon the holy mountain of God; thou hast walked up and down in the midst of the stones of fire.
It describes the sound of their wings, "like the roar of rushing waters." 
Ezekiel 10:5-7 ; Ezekiel 10:8 reveals that they have hands like a man under their wings .
Ezekiel 1:7 KJV reveals that they look like man but are different because they have "straight feet" and four wings and four faces.
Ezekiel ch 1, and 10 describe the cherubim creatures ascending and descending from the earth with wheels. Ezekiel 1:14-20 ; Ezekiel 10:16
Ezekiel 10:9-13 describes what the wheels appeared to look like, and how they moved around, how they moved or flew through the sky quickly but turned not as they went; and how the inside workings of the wheels appeared to be "a wheel in the midst of a wheel" and that the color of the wheels was the color of "Amber" Stone. There are four separate wheels in both accounts, one for each single cherub which is there. 
In art.
They are often shown in art as having wings and a halo. The wings represent their speed, and the halo represents their holiness. 
The cherubim in art always appear as baby faced angels with very small non useful wings.
The cherubim statue or bronze casting of cherubim in the Temple of Solomon depicted them as two four winged creatures whose wings touched at the peak of the ark that they were making.
The same cherubim creatures were said to be cast in gold on top of the Ark of the Covenant. Casting metal is one of the oldest forms of artwork, and was attempted by Leonardo Da Vinci.
Angelology.
The study of Angels is called Angelology.
Other websites.
 Media related to at Wikimedia Commons

</doc>
<doc id="35" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35" title="Ad hominem">
Ad hominem

Ad hominem is a Latin word for a type of argument. It is a word often used in rhetoric. Rhetoric is the science of speaking well, and convincing other people of your ideas. 
Translated to English, "ad hominem" means "against the person". In other words, when someone makes an ad hominem, they are attacking the person they are arguing against, instead of what they are saying. 
The term comes from the Latin word "homo", which means human. "Hominem" is a gender neutral version of the word "homo". In ancient Rome it referred to all free men, or in other words, all free human beings. 
Ad hominem can be a way to use reputation, rumors and hearsay to change the minds of other people listening. When a social network has already excluded or exiled one person, or applied a negative label to them, this can work more often.
It is most of the time considered to be a weak and poor argument. In courts and in diplomacy ad hominems are not appreciated.
Ad hominems are not wrong every time. For example, when people think that someone can't be trusted, things that they have said previously can be doubted.
What an ad hominem argument looks like.
In logic, a proof is something that starts with premises, and goes through a few logical arguments, to reach a conclusion.
Ad hominem example.
In this example it can be seen that the (completely unrelated) fact that person A is uneducated and poor is used to prove that abortion should not be illegal.

</doc>
<doc id="37" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37" title="Native American">
Native American

Native Americans (also Aboriginal Americans, American Indians, Amerindians, or Indigenous Peoples of America) are the people who were in North America, Central America, South America, and the Caribbean Islands when Europeans arrived. 
Christopher Columbus was travelling west, so he thought he was going to India. This is why he called the people "Indians". There are more than three million Native Americans in Canada and the U.S. combined.
Sometimes these people are called "Indians", but this is confusing, because it is the same word used for people from India. There are many different tribes of Amerindian people, with many different languages. 
Many Amerindians died after the Europeans came to the Americas, from diseases that came with the Europeans that were new to the Amerindians, in wars with the Europeans, or because the Europeans made them work as slaves. Most of the Amerindians were hurt or killed by settlers who took their lands.
The ancestors of American Indians came to the Americas from Asia. Some of them may have come to America over 12,000 years ago when Alaska was connected to Siberia by the Bering land bridge.
Some Indian tribes and languages of North America are Cherokee, Maya or Yucatec, Aztecs, Navajo, and Sioux. 
Some Indian tribes and languages of South America are Aymara, Guarani, Quechua, and Tupi.

</doc>
<doc id="39" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39" title="Apple">
Apple

This page is about the fruit. For the company that makes computers and mobile devices, see Apple Inc.. For other uses, see Apple (disambiguation).
The apple is a fleshy fruit from the apple tree. It is in the species "Malus domestica" in the rose family Rosaceae. The apple is one of the most grown tree fruits. It is grown in orchards.
The apple tree came from Central Asia. Its wild ancestor is still there today. There are more than 
7 493 kinds of different apple trees.
At least 55 million tons of apples were grown around in the world in 2005. All together, they cost about $10 billion. China produced about 35% of the world's apples. The United States produces more than 7.5% of the apples around the world. This makes it the second greatest producer. Iran is third, after which comes Turkey, Russia, Italy and India.
Botanical information.
The apple has a small, leaf-shedding tree that grows up to 30 to 12 metres (9.8 to 39 ft) tall. The apple tree has a broad crown with thick twigs.
The leaves are alternately arranged simple ovals. They are 5 to 12 centimetres long and 3–6 centimetres (1.2–2.4 in) wide. It has a sharp top with a soft underside. Blossoms come out in spring at the same time that the leaves begin to bud. The flowers are white. They also have a slightly pink color. They are five petaled, and 2.5 to 3.5 centimetres (0.98 to 1.4 in) in diameter. The fruit matures in autumn. It is usually 5 to 9 centimetres (2.0 to 3.5 in) in diameter. There are five carpels arranged in a star in the middle of the fruit. Every carpel has one to three seeds.
Wild ancestors.
The wild ancestors of "applus Treeus" are "Malus sieversii". They grow wild in the mountains of Central Asia in the north of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and Xinjiang, China, and possibly also "Malus sylvestris". Unlike domesticated apples, their leaves become red in autumn. They are being used recently to develop "Malus domestica" to grow in colder climates.
History.
The apple tree was possibly the earliest tree to be cultivated. Its fruits have become better over thousands of years. It is said that Alexander the Great discovered dwarfed apples in Asia Minor in 300 BCE. Asia and Europe have used winter apples as an important food for thousands of years. From when Europeans arrived, Argentina and the United States have used apples as food as well. Apples were brought to North America in the 1600s. The first apple orchard on the North American continent was said to be near Boston in 1625. In the 1900s, costly fruit industries, where the apple was a very important species, began developing.
In culture.
Germanic paganism.
In Norse mythology, the goddess Iðunn gives apples to the gods in "Prose Edda" (written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson) that makes them young forever. English scholar H. R. Ellis Davidson suggests that apples were related to religious practices in Germanic paganism. It was from there, she claims, that Norse paganism developed. She points out that buckets of apples were discovered in the place of burial for the Oseberg ship in Norway. She also remarks that fruit and nuts (Iðunn having been described as changing into a nut in "Skáldskaparmál") have been discovered in the early graves of the Germanic peoples in England. They have also been discovered somewhere else on the continent of Europe. She suggests that this may have had a symbolic meaning. Nuts are still a symbol of fertility in Southwest England.
Sometimes apples are eaten after they are cooked. Often apples are eaten uncooked. Apples can also be made into drinks. Apple juice and apple cider are apple drinks. 
The flesh of the fruit is firm with a taste anywhere from sour to sweet. Apples used for cooking are sour, and need to be cooked with sugar, while other apples are sweet, and do not need cooking. There are some seeds at the core, that can be removed with a tool that removes the core, or by carefully using a knife.
The scientific name of the apple tree genus in the Latin language is "Malus". Most apples that people grow are of the "Malus domestica" species.
Most apples are good to eat raw (not cooked), and are also used in many kinds of baked foods, such as apple pie. Apples are cooked until they are soft to make apple sauce.
Apples are also made into the drinks apple juice and cider. Usually, cider contains a little alcohol, about as much as beer. The regions of Brittany in France and Cornwall in England are known for their apple ciders.
If one wants to grow a certain type of apple it is not possible to do this by planting a seed from the wanted type. The seed will have DNA from the apple that the seeds came from, but it will also have DNA from the apple flower that pollinated the seeds, which may well be a different type. This means that the tree which would grow from planting would be a mixture of two. In order to grow a certain type of apple, a small twig, or 'scion', is cut from the tree that grows the type of apple desired, and then added on to a specially grown stump called a rootstock. The tree that grows will only create apples of the type needed.
Apple cultivars.
There are more than 7,500 known cultivars of apples. Different cultivars are available for temperate and subtropical climates. One large collection of over 2,100 apple cultivars is at the National Fruit Collection in England. Most of these cultivars are grown for eating fresh (dessert apples). However, some are grown simply for cooking or making cider. Cider apples are usually too tart to eat immediately. However, they give cider a rich flavor that dessert apples cannot.
Most popular apple cultivars are soft but crisp. Colorful skin, easy shipping, disease resistance, 'Red Delicious' apple shape, and popular flavor are also needed. Modern apples are usually sweeter than older cultivars. This is because popular tastes in apples have become different. Most North Americans and Europeans enjoy sweet apples. Extremely sweet apples with hardly any acid taste are popular in Asia and India.
In the United Kingdom.
In the United Kingdom there are about 3000 different types of apples. The most common apple type grown in England is the 'Bramley seedling', which is a popular cooking apple.
Apple orchards are not as common as they were in the early 1900s, when apples were rarely brought in from other countries. Organizations such as teach people about the importance of rare and local varieties of fruit. 'Apple Day' is celebrated each October 21 in many countries.
In North America.
Many apples are grown in temperate parts of the United States and Canada. In many areas where apple growing is important, people have huge celebrations:
Varieties of apples.
There are lots of different varieties of apples, including:
Family.
Apples are in the group Maloideae. It is a subfamily of the family "Rosaceae". They are in the same subfamily as pears. Its family is the family of rose like plants, and roses are in the family.
Other websites.
 Find more information on Apple by searching one of Wikipedia's :
 Dictionary definitions from Wiktionary<br>
 from Wikibooks<br>
 from Wikiquote<br>
 from Wikisource<br>
 from Commons<br>
 from Wikinews<br>
 from Wikiversity<br>
 from Wikispecies<br>
 from Wikidata<br>
 from MediaWiki

</doc>
<doc id="43" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43" title="Abrahamic religion">
Abrahamic religion

An Abrahamic religion is a religion whose people believe that Abraham and his decendants hold an important role in human spiritual development. The best known Abrahamic religions are Judaism, Christianity, Islam, and the Bahá'í Faith. Smaller religious traditions occasionally listed among the larger Abrahamic religions include: Samaritanism, Druze, Rastafari, Mandaeism, and Babism.
Abrahamic religions are "Monotheistic", meaning that they believe in just one God. They also all believe that people should pray to and worship this God often.
Other websites.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="45" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45" title="Algebra">
Algebra

Algebra is a part of mathematics (often called "math" in the United States and maths in the United Kingdom ). It uses variables to represent a value that is not yet known. When an equals sign (=) is used, this is called an equation. A very simple equation using a variable is: 2 + 3 = x In this example, x = 5, or it could also be said, "x is five". This is called "solving for x". 
Besides equations, there are inequalities ("less than" and "greater than"). A special type of equation is called the function. This is often used in making graphs.
Algebra can be used to solve real problems because the rules of algebra work in real life and numbers can be used to represent the values of real things. Physics, engineering and computer programming are areas that use algebra all the time. It is also useful to know in surveying, construction and business, especially accounting.
People who do algebra need to know the rules of numbers and mathematic operations used on numbers, starting with adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing. More advanced operations involve exponents, starting with squares and square roots. Many of these rules can also be used on the variables, and this is where it starts to get interesting.
Algebra was first used to solve equations and inequalities. Two examples are linear equations (the equation of a line, y=mx+b) and quadratic equations, which has variables that are squared (power of two, a number that is multiplied by itself, for example: 2*2, 3*3, x*x). How to factor polynomials is needed for quadratic equations.
History.
Early forms of algebra were developed by the Babylonians and the Greeks. However the word "algebra" is a Latin form of the Arabic word "Al-Jabr" ("casting") and comes from a mathematics book "Al-Maqala fi Hisab-al Jabr wa-al-Muqabilah", ("Essay on the Computation of Casting and Equation") written in the 9th century by a famous Persian mathematician, Muhammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī, who was a Muslim born in Khwarizm in Uzbekistan. He flourished under Al-Ma'moun in Baghdad, Iraq through 813-833 AD, and died around 840 AD. The book was brought into Europe and translated into Latin in the 12th century. The book was then given the name 'Algebra'. (The ending of the mathematician's name, al-Khwarizmi, was changed into a word easier to say in Latin, and became the English word "algorithm".) 
Examples.
Here is a simple example of an algebra problem:
These are the steps you can use to solve the problem:
With practice, algebra can be used when faced with a problem that is too hard to solve any other way. Problems such as building a freeway, designing a cell phone, or finding the cure for a disease all require algebra.
Writing algebra.
As in most parts of mathematics, adding "z" to "y" (or "y" plus "z") is written as y + z.
Subtracting "z" from "y" (or "y" minus "z") is written as y − z.
Dividing "y" by "z" (or "y" over "z": formula_1) is written as y ÷ z or y/z. y/z is more commonly used.
In algebra, multiplying "y" by "z" (or "y" times "z") can be written in 4 ways: y × z, y * z, y·z, or just yz. The multiplication symbol "×" is usually not used, because it looks too much like the letter x, which is often used as a variable. Also, when multiplying a larger expression, parentheses can be used: y (z+1).
When we multiply a number and a letter in algebra, we write the number in front of the letter: 5 × y = 5y. When the number is 1, then the 1 is not written because 1 times any number is that number (1 × "y" = "y") and so it is not needed.
Functions and Graphs.
An important part of algebra is the study of functions, since functions often appear in equations that we are trying to solve. A function is like a box you can put a number or numbers into and get a certain number out. When using functions, graphs can be powerful tools in helping us to study the solutions to equations. 
A graph is a picture that shows all the values of the variables that make the equation or inequality true. Usually this is easy to make when there are only one or two variables. The graph is often a line, and if the line does not bend or go straight up-and-down it can be described by the basic formula y = mx + b. The variable "b" is the y-intercept of the graph (where the line crosses the vertical axis) and "m" is the slope or steepness of the line. This formula applies to the coordinates of a graph, where each point on the line is written (x, y). 
In some math problems like the equation for a line, there can be more than one variable ("x" and "y" in this case). To find points on the line, one variable is changed. The variable that is changed is called the "independent" variable. Then the math is done to make a number. The number that is made is called the "dependent" variable. Most of the time the independent variable is written as "x" and the dependent variable is written as "y", for example, in y = 3x + 1. This is often put on a graph, using an "x" axis (going left and right) and a "y" axis (going up and down). It can also be written in function form: f(x) = 3x + 1. So in this example, we could put in 5 for "x" and get y = 16. Put in 2 for "x" would get y=7. And 0 for "x" would get y=1. So there would be a line going thru the points (5,16), (2,7), and (0,1) as seen in the graph to the right.
If x has a power of 1, it is a straight line. If it is squared or some other power, it will be curved. If it uses an inequality ("<" or ">"), then usually part of the graph is shaded, either above or below the line.
Rules of algebra.
In algebra, there are a few rules that can be used for further understanding of equations. These are called the rules of algebra. While these rules may seem senseless or obvious, it is wise to understand that these properties do not hold throughout all branches of mathematics. Therefore, it will be useful to know how these axiomatic rules are declared, before taking them for granted. Before going on to the rules, reflect on two definitions that will be given.
Rules.
Commutative property of addition.
'Commutative' means that a function has the same result if the numbers are swapped around. In other words, the order of the terms in an equation do not matter. When the operator of two terms is an addition, the 'commutative property of addition' is applicable. In algebraic terms, this gives formula_6.
Note that this does not apply for subtraction! (i.e. formula_7)
Commutative property of multiplication.
When the operator of two terms is an multiplication, the 'commutative property of multiplication' is applicable. In algebraic terms, this gives formula_8.
Note that this does not apply for division! (i.e. formula_9, when formula_10)
Associative property of addition.
'Associative' refers to the grouping of numbers. The associative property of addition implies that, when adding three or more terms, it doesn't matter how these terms are grouped. Algebraically, this gives formula_11. Note that this does not hold for subtraction, e.g. formula_12 (see the distributive property).
Associative property of multiplication.
The associative property of multiplication implies that, when multiplying three or more terms, it doesn't matter how these terms are grouped. Algebraically, this gives formula_13. Note that this does not hold for division, e.g. formula_14.
Distributive property.
The distributive property states that the multiplication of a number by another term can be distributed. For instance: formula_15. (Do "not "confuse this with the associative properties! For instance, formula_16.)
Additive identity property.
'Identity' refers to the property of a number that it is equal to itself. In other words, there exists an operation of two numbers so that it equals the variable of the sum. The additive identity property states that the sum of any number and 0 is that number: formula_17. This also holds for subtraction: formula_18.
Multiplicative identity property.
The multiplicative identity property states that the product of any number and 1 is that number: formula_19. This also holds for division: formula_20.
Additive inverse property.
The additive inverse property is somewhat like the opposite of the additive identity property. When an operation is the sum of a number and its opposite, and it equals 0, that operation is a valid algebraic operation. Algebraically, it states the following: formula_21. Additive inverse of 1 is (-1).
Multiplicative inverse property.
The multiplicative inverse property entails that when an operation is the product of a number and its reciprocal, and it equals 1, that operation is a valid algebraic operation. Algebraically, it states the following: formula_22. Multiplicative inverse of 2 is 1/2.
Advanced Algebra.
In addition to "elementary algebra", or basic algebra, there are advanced forms of algebra, taught in colleges and universities, such as abstract algebra, linear algebra, and universal algebra. 
This includes how to use a matrix to solve many linear equations at once. "Abstract algebra" is the study of things that are found in equations. For example, polynomials and matrices. These things are known as algebraic structures. Understanding the properties of more complex algebraic structures can help us solve more complex equations.
Many math problems are about physics and engineering. In many of these physics problems time is a variable. Time uses the letter "t". Using the basic ideas in algebra can help reduce a math problem to its simplest form making it easier to solve difficult problems. Energy is "e", force is "f", mass is "m", acceleration is "a" and speed of light is sometimes "c". This is used in some famous equations, like f = ma and e=mc^2 (although more complex math beyond algebra was needed to come up with that last equation).

</doc>
<doc id="47" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47" title="Atom">
Atom

For the internet feed, see Atom (feed).
An atom is the basic unit that makes up all matter. There are many different types of atoms, each with its own name, mass and size. These different types of atoms are called chemical elements. The chemical elements are organized on the periodic table. Examples of elements are hydrogen and gold. Atoms are very small, but the exact size changes depending on the element. Atoms range from 0.1 to 0.5 nanometers in width. One nanometer is around 100,000 times smaller than the width of a human hair. This makes atoms impossible to see without special tools. Equations must be used to see the way they work and how they interact with other atoms. 
Atoms come together to make molecules or particles: for example, two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom combine to make a water molecule, a form of a chemical reaction. 
Atoms themselves are made up of three kinds of smaller particles, called protons (which are positively charged), neutrons (which have no charge) and electrons (which are negatively charged). The protons and neutrons are in the middle of the atom. They are called the nucleus. They are surrounded by a cloud of electrons which are attracted to the nucleus' positive charge. This attraction is called electromagnetic force. 
Protons and neutrons are made up of even smaller particles called quarks. Electrons are elementary or fundamental particles; they cannot be split into smaller parts. 
The number of protons, neutrons and electrons an atom has determines what element it is. Hydrogen, for example, has one proton, no neutrons and one electron; the element sulfur has 16 protons, 16 neutrons and 16 electrons.
Atoms move faster when in gas form (as they are free to move) than liquid and solid matter. In solid materials, the atoms are tightly next to each other so they vibrate, but are not able to move (there is no room) as atoms in liquids do.
History.
The word "atom" comes from the Greek (ἀτόμος), "indivisible", from (ἀ)-, "not," and τόμος, "a cut." The first historical mention of the word atom came from works by the Greek philosopher Democritus, around 400 BC. Atomic theory stayed as a mostly philosophical subject, with not much actual scientific investigation or study, until the development of chemistry in the 1650s. 
In 1777 French chemist Antoine Lavoisier defined the term "element" for the first time. He said that an element was any basic substance that could not be broken down into other substances by the methods of chemistry. Any substance that could be broken down was a "compound".
In 1803, English philosopher John Dalton suggested that elements were tiny, solid spheres made of atoms. Dalton believed that all atoms of the same element have the same mass. He said that compounds are formed when atoms of more than one element combine. According to Dalton, in a compound, atoms of different elements always combine the same way.
In 1827, British scientist Robert Brown looked at pollen grains in water and used Dalton's atomic theory to describe patterns in the way they moved. This was called "Brownian Motion". In 1905 Albert Einstein used mathematics to prove that the seemingly random movements were down to the reactions of atoms, and by doing so he conclusively proved the existence of the atom.
In 1869 scientist Dmitri Mendeleev published the first version of the periodic table. The periodic table groups atoms by their atomic number (how many protons they have. This is usually the same as the number of electrons). 
Elements in the same column, or period, usually have similar properties. For example helium, neon, argon, krypton and xenon are all in the same column and have very similar properties. All these elements are gases that have no colour and no smell. Together they are known as the noble gases.
The physicist J.J. Thomson was the first man to discover electrons. This happened while he was working with cathode rays in 1897. He realized they had a negative charge, unlike protons (positive) and neutrons (no charge). Thomson created the plum pudding model, which stated that an atom was like plum pudding: the dried fruit (electrons) were stuck in a mass of pudding (protons). In 1909, a scientist named Ernest Rutherford used the Geiger–Marsden experiment to prove that most of an atom is in a very small space called the atomic nucleus. Rutherford took a photo plate and surrounded it with gold foil, and then shot alpha particles at it. Many of the particles went through the gold foil, which proved that atoms are mostly empty space. Electrons are so small they make up only 1% of an atom's mass. 
In 1913, Niels Bohr introduced the Bohr model. This model showed that electrons orbit the nucleus in fixed circular orbits. This was more accurate than the Rutherford model. However, it was still not completely right. Improvements to the Bohr model have been made since it was first introduced.
In 1925, chemist Frederick Soddy found that some elements in the periodic table had more than one kind of atom. 
For example any atom with 2 protons should be a helium atom. Usually, a helium nucleus also contains two neutrons. However, some helium atoms have only one neutron. This means they are still helium, as the element is defined by the number of protons, but they are not normal helium either. Soddy called an atom like this, with a different number of neutrons, an "isotope". To get the name of the isotope we look at how many protons and neutrons it has in its nucleus and add this to the name of the element. So a helium atom with two protons and one neutron is called helium-3, and a carbon atom with six protons and six neutrons is called carbon-12. However, when he developed his theory Soddy could not be certain neutrons actually existed. To prove they were real, physicist James Chadwick and a team of others created the mass spectrometer. The mass spectrometer actually measures the mass and weight of individual atoms. By doing this Chadwick proved that to account for all the weight of the atom, neutrons must exist. 
In 1937, German chemist Otto Hahn became the first person to create nuclear fission in a laboratory. He discovered this by chance when he was shooting neutrons at a uranium atom, hoping to create a new isotope. However, he noticed that instead of a new isotope the uranium simply changed into a barium atom. This was the world's first recorded nuclear fission reaction. This discovery eventually led to the creation of the atomic bomb. 
Further into the 20th century physicists went deeper into the mysteries of the atom. Using particle accelerators they discovered that protons and neutrons were actually made of other particles, called quarks.
The most accurate model so far comes from the Schrödinger equation. Schrödinger realized that the electrons exist in a cloud around the nucleus, called the electron cloud. In the electron cloud, it is impossible to know exactly where electrons are. The Schrödinger equation is used to find out where an electron is likely to be. This area is called the electron's orbital.
Structure and parts.
Parts.
The complex atom is made up of three main particles; the proton, the neutron and the electron. The isotope of Hydrogen Hydrogen-1 has no neutrons, and a positive hydrogen ion has no electrons. These are the only known exceptions, all other atoms have at least one proton, neutron and electron each. 
Electrons are by far the smallest of the three, their mass and size is too small to be measured using current technology. They have a negative charge. Protons and neutrons are of similar size to each other Protons are positively charged and neutrons have no charge. 
Most atoms have a neutral charge; because the number of protons (positive) and electrons (negative) are the same, the charges balance out to zero. However in ions (different number of electrons) this is not always the case and they can have a positive or a negative charge. Protons and Neutrons are made out of quarks, of two types; up quarks and down quarks. A proton is made of two up quarks and one down quark and a neutron is made of two down quarks and one up quark.
Nucleus.
The nucleus is in the middle of an atom. It is made up of protons and neutrons. Usually in nature, two things with the same charge repel or shoot away from each other. So for a long time it was a mystery to scientists how the positively charged protons in the nucleus stayed together. They solved this by finding a particle called a Gluon. Its name comes from the word "glue" as Gluons act like atomic glue, sticking the protons together using the "strong nuclear force". It is this force which also holds the quarks together that make up the protons and neutrons.
The number of neutrons in relation to protons defines whether the nucleus is stable or goes through radioactive decay. When there are too many neutrons or protons, the atom tries to make the numbers the same by getting rid of the extra particles. It does this by emitting radiation in the form of alpha, beta or gamma decay. Nuclei can change through other means too. Nuclear fission is when the Nucleus splits into two smaller nuclei, releasing a lot of stored energy. This release energy is what makes nuclear fission useful for making bombs and electricity, in the form of nuclear power. 
The other way nuclei can change is through nuclear fusion, when two nuclei join together, or fuse, to make a heavier nucleus. This process requires extreme amounts of energy in order to overcome the electrostatic repulsion between the protons, as they have the same charge. Such high energies are most common in stars like our Sun, which fuses hydrogen for fuel.
Electrons.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : Electron
Electrons orbit or go around the nucleus. They are called the atom's "electron cloud". They are attracted towards the nucleus because of the electromagnetic force. Electrons have a negative charge and the nucleus always has a positive charge, so they attract each other. 
Around the nucleus some electrons are further out than others. These are called "electron shells". In most atoms the first shell has two electrons, and all after that have eight. Exceptions are rare, but they do happen and are difficult to predict. The further away the electron is from the nucleus, the weaker the pull of the nucleus on it. This is why bigger atoms, with more electrons, react more easily with other atoms.
The electromagnetism of the nucleus is not enough to hold onto their electrons and they lose them to the strong attraction of smaller atoms. 
Radioactive decay.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : Radioactive decay
Some elements, and many isotopes, have what is called an "unstable nucleus". This means the nucleus is either too big to hold itself together or has too many protons, electrons or neutrons. When this happens the nucleus has to get rid of the excess mass or particles. It does this through radiation. An atom that does this can be called "radioactive". Unstable atoms continue to be radioactive until they lose enough mass/particles that they become stable. All atoms above atomic number 82 (82 protons) are radioactive.
There are three main types of radioactive decay; alpha, beta and gamma.
Every radioactive element or isotope has something called a "half life". This is how long it takes half of any sample of atoms of that type to decay until they become a different stable isotope or element. Large atoms, or isotopes with a big difference between the number of protons and neutrons will therefore have a long half life.
Ernest Rutherford was the first to discover two of the three
types of ionising radiation, alpha and Beta Particles, being emitted from the
natural isotope radium
 put radium in a light
bulb to watch it decay, suddenly helium (which consists of 2 protons and 2
neurons) appeared inside the glass bulb 
Marie Curie discovered the first form of radiation, she
found the Element named radium. She was also the first female recipient of the
noble prize
Frederick Soddy conducted an experiment to observe what
happens as radium decays, he placed a sample in a light bulb and waited for it
to decay. Suddenly helium (containing 2 protons and 2 neutrons) appeared in the
bulb, and from this experiment he discovered this type of radiation has a
positive charge
James Chadwick discovered the neutron, by observing decay
products of different types of radioactive isotopes. Chadwick noticed that the
atomic number of the elements was lower than the total atomic mass of the atom.
He concluded that electrons would not of had contributed to the atomic mass
because they barely have mass
Enrico Fermi, used the neutrons to shoot them at uranium, he
discovered that uranium decayed a lot faster than usual and produced a lot of
alpha and beta particles. He also believed that uranium transmutated into a new
element he called Hesperium
Otto Hanh and Fritz Strassman repeated Fermi's experiment to
see if the new element Hesperium was actually created, they discovered two new
things Fermi did not observe. By using a lot of neutrons the nucleus of the
atom would split the nucleus producing a lot of heat energy. Also the fission
products of Uranium were already discovered, Thorium, Palladium, Radium, Radon
and Lead
Fermi then noticed that the fission of one uranium atom let
off more neutrons which then split other atoms creating chain reactions. He
realised that this process is called nuclear fission and could create crazy
amounts of heat energy
That very discovery of Fermi's lead to the development of
the first nuclear bomb code named 'Trinity'
Nuclear energy is harnessed to create electricity and soon
becomes the most popular

</doc>
<doc id="48" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48" title="Astronomy">
Astronomy

Astronomy is the study of the universe and everything in it. This includes stars, planets and galaxies as well as other things. The word astronomy comes from the Greek words "astron" which means star and "nomos" which means law. A person who studies astronomy is called an astronomer.
Astronomy is one of the oldest sciences. Ancient people used the positions of the stars to navigate, and to find when was the best time to plant crops. Astronomy is very similar to astrophysics. Since the 20th century there have been two main types of astronomy, "observational" and "theoretical" astronomy. Observational astronomy uses telescopes and cameras to "observe" or look at stars, galaxies and other astronomical objects. Theoretical astronomy uses maths and computer models to predict what should happen. The two often work together, the theoretical predicts what should happen and the observational shows whether the prediction works. 
Astronomy is not the same as "astrology", the belief that the patterns the stars and the planets may affect human lives. 
History of astronomy.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : History of astronomy
Ancient.
Early astronomers used only their eyes to look at the stars. They used maps of the constellations and stars for religious reasons and also to work out the time of year. Early civilisations such as the Maya people and the Ancient Egyptians built simple observatories and drew maps of the stars positions. They also began to think about the place of Earth in the universe. For a long time people thought Earth was the center of the universe, and that the planets, the stars and the sun went around it. This is known as the "geocentric" model of the Universe.
Ancient Greeks tried to explain the motions of the sun and stars by taking measurements. A mathematician named Eratosthenes was the first who measured the size of the Earth and proved that the Earth is a sphere. A theory by another mathematician named Aristarchus was, that the sun is in the center and the Earth is moving around it. This is known as the "Heliocentric" model. Only a small group of people thought it was right. The rest continued to believe in the "geocentric" model.
Most of the names of constellations and stars that we have, come from Greeks of that time. 
Arabic astronomers made many advancements during the Middle Ages including improved star maps and ways to estimate the size of the Earth.
Renaissance to modern era.
During the renaissance a priest named Nicolaus Copernicus thought, from looking at the way the planets moved, that the Earth was not the center of everything. Based on previous works, he said that the Earth was a planet and all the planets moved around the sun, bringing the "heliocentric" model back to the light. A physicist called Galileo Galilei built his own telescope, and used it to look more closely at the stars and planets for the first time. He agreed with Copernicus. Their ideas were also improved by Johannes Kepler and Isaac Newton who came up with the theory of gravity. At this time the Catholic Church decided that Galileo was wrong. The Pope gave the order to lock Galileo up in his house and they did not let him write any more books until he died.
After Galileo, people made better telescopes and used them to see farther objects such as the planets Uranus and Neptune. They also saw how stars were similar to our Sun, but in a range of colours and sizes. They also saw thousands of other faraway objects such as galaxies and nebulae.
Modern era.
The 20th century saw important changes in astronomy.
In 1931, Karl Jansky discovered radio emission from outside the Earth when trying to isolate a source of noise in radio communications, marking the birth of radio astronomy and the first attempts at using another part of the electromagnetic spectrum to observe the sky. Those parts of the electromagnetic spectrum that the atmosphere did not block were now opened up to astronomy, allowing more discoveries to be made.
The opening of this new window on the Universe saw the discovery of entirely new things, for example pulsars, which sent regular pulses of radio waves out into space. The waves were first thought to be alien in origin because the pulses were so regular that it implied an artificial source.
The period after World War 2 saw more observatories where large and accurate telescopes are built and operated at good observing sites, normally by governments. For example, Bernard Lovell began radio astronomy at Jodrell Bank using leftover military radar equipment. By 1957, the site had the largest steerable radio telescope in the world. Similarly, the end of the 1960s saw the start of the building of dedicated observatories at Mauna Kea in Hawaii, a good site for visible and infra-red telescopes thanks to its high altitude and clear skies. Mauna Kea would eventually come to host very large and very accurate telescopes like the Keck Observatory with its 10-meter mirror. 
The next great revolution in astronomy was thanks to the birth of rocketry. This allowed telescopes to be placed in space on satellites.
Satellite-based telescopes opened up the Universe to human eyes. Turbulence in the Earth's atmosphere blurs images taken by ground-based telescopes, an effect known as seeing. It is this effect that makes stars "twinkle" in the sky. As a result, the pictures taken by satellite telescopes in visible light (for example, by the Hubble Space Telescope) are much clearer than Earth-based telescopes, even though Earth-based telescopes are very large.
Space telescopes gave access, for the first time in history, to the entire electromagnetic spectrum including rays that had been blocked by the atmosphere. The X-rays, gamma rays, ultraviolet light and parts of the infra-red spectrum were all opened to astronomy as observing telescopes were launched. As with other parts of the spectrum, new discoveries were made.
From 1970s satellites were launched to be replaced with more accurate and better satellites, causing the sky to be mapped in nearly all parts of the electromagnetic spectrum.
Discoveries.
Discoveries broadly come in two types: bodies and phenomena. Bodies are things in the Universe, whether it is a planet like our Earth or a galaxy like our Milky Way. Phenomena are events and happenings in the Universe. 
Bodies.
For convenience, this section has been divided by where these astronomical bodies may be found: those found around stars are solar bodies, those inside galaxies are galactic bodies and everything else larger are cosmic bodies.
Galactic.
Diffuse Objects:
Compact Stars:
Phenomena.
Burst events are those where there is a sudden change in the heavens that disappears quickly. These are called bursts because they are normally associated with large explosions producing a "burst" of energy. They include: 
Periodic events are those that happen regularly in a repetitive way. The name periodic comes from period, which is the length of time required for a wave to complete one cycle. Periodic phenomena include: 
Noise phenomena tend to relate to things that happened a long time ago. The signal from these events bounce around the Universe until it seems to come from everywhere and varies little in intensity. In this way, it resembles "noise", the background signal that pervades every instrument used for astronomy. The most common example of noise is static seen on analogue televisions. The principal astronomical example is: Cosmic background radiation.
Methods.
Techniques.
There are way astronomers can get better pictures of the heavens. Light from a distant source reaches a sensor and gets measured, normally by a human eye or a camera. For very dim sources, there may not be enough light particles coming from the source for it to be seen. One technique that astronomers have for making it visible is using "integration", (which is like longer exposures in photography).
Integration.
Astronomical sources do not move much: only the rotation and movement of the Earth causes them to move across the heavens. As light particles reach the camera over time, they hit the same place making it brighter and more visible than the background, until it can be seen. 
Telescopes at most observatories (and satellite instruments) can normally track a source as it moves across the heavens, making the star appear still to the telescope and allowing longer exposures. Also, images can be taken on different nights so exposures span hours, days or even months. In the digital era, digitised pictures of the sky can be added together by computer, which overlays the images after correcting for movement.
Aperture synthesis.
With radio telescopes smaller telescopes can be combined together to create a big one, which works like one as big as the distance between the two smaller telescopes.
Adaptive optics.
Adaptive optics means changing the shape of the mirror or lens while looking at something, to see it better.
Data analysis.
Data analysis is the process of getting more information out of an astronomical observation than by simply looking at it. The observation is first stored as data. This data will then have various techniques used to analysis\analyse it.
Fourier analysis.
Fourier analysis in mathematics can show if an observation (over a length of time) is changing periodically (changes like a wave). If so, it can extract the frequencies and the type of wave pattern, and find many things including new planets.
Fields.
A good example of a fields comes from pulsars which pulse regularly in radio waves. These turned out to be similar to some (but not all) of a type of bright source in X-rays called a Low-mass X-ray binary. It turned out that all pulsars and some LMXBs are neutron stars and that the differences were due to the environment in which the neutron star was found. Those LMXBs that were not neutron stars turned out to be black holes.
This section attempts to provide an overview of the important fields of astronomy, their period of importance and the terms used to describe them. It should be noted that astronomy in the Modern Era has been divided mainly by electromagnetic spectrum, although there is some evidence this is changing.
Fields by body.
Solar astronomy.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : Sun
Solar astronomy is the study of the Sun. The Sun is the closest star to Earth at around 92 million (92,000,000) miles away. It is the easiest to observe in detail. Observing the Sun can help us understand how other stars work and are formed. Changes in the Sun can affect the weather and climate on Earth. A stream of charged particles called the Solar wind is constantly sent off from the Sun. The Solar Wind hitting the Earth's magnetic field causes the northern lights. Studying the Sun helped people understand how nuclear fusion works.
Planetary astronomy.
Planetary Astronomy is the study of planets, moons, dwarf planets, comets and asteroids as well as other small objects that orbit stars. The planets of our own Solar System have been studied in depth by many visiting spacecraft such as Cassini-Huygens (Saturn) and the Voyager 1 and 2.
Galactic astronomy.
Galactic Astronomy is the study of distant galaxies. Studying distant galaxies is the best way of learning about our own galaxy, as the gases and stars in our own galaxy make it difficult to observe. Galactic Astronomers attempt to understand the structure of galaxies and how they are formed through the use of different types of telescopes and computer simulations.
Fields by electromagnetic spectrum.
Magnetohydrodynamics (MHD).
Hydrodynamics is used in astronomy for mathematically modelling how gases behave. Strong magnetic fields found around many bodies can drastically change how these gases behave, affecting things from star formation to the flows of gases around compact stars. This makes MHD an important and useful tool in astronomy.
Other fields.
Gravitational wave astronomy.
Gravitational wave astronomy is the study of the Universe in the gravitational wave spectrum. So far, all astronomy that has been done has used the electromagnetic spectrum. Gravitational Waves are ripples in spacetime emitted by very dense objects changing shape, which include white dwarves, neutron stars and black holes. Because no one has been able to detect gravitational waves directly, the impact of Gravitational Wave Astronomy has been very limited.

</doc>
<doc id="49" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49" title="Architecture">
Architecture

Architecture is the science of the design of structures or buildings such as houses, places of worship, office buildings. Architecture is also the profession of an architect. A person must study at an institution of higher education to become an architect. Architecture can be about small designs such as a garage or large designs such as a whole city. Architecture often overlaps with civil engineering, and architects and civil engineers often work together.
History.
In the past, people built huts and wood houses to protect themselves from the weather. For safety, they were often close together. Great civilizations like the Ancient Egyptians built large temples and structures, like the Great Pyramids of Giza. The Ancient Greeks and Romans made what we now call "Classical Architecture". The Romans, working over 2000 years ago, copied the arch from the Etruscans, who copied it from the Mesopotamians. The stone columns, which still hold up so many important buildings, like the Parthenon in Athens, were simply copied from the first wooden posts.
Classical Architecture was very formal, and it always obeyed laws. It used symmetry, which really means balance, and it used proportion which means keeping shapes in certain ways. The Golden Mean was a rule (or law) which said, (to put it very simply) if you are making a room, or any other thing, it will work best if you always make the long side 1.6 times longer than the short side. There are many laws in Classical Architecture, like how high the middle of an arched bridge needs to be (which depends on how wide the bridge needs to be). These laws were learned from thousands of years of experience and they are as true today as they were 2000 years ago.
In some parts of the world, like India, the architecture is famous for carving the stone on temples and palaces. Different architectural styles were made in China, Japan, Southeast Asia, Africa, Mexico, and Central and South America.
Later, people in Western Europe in the Middle Ages made Romanesque architecture, then Gothic architecture. Gothic buildings have tall, pointed windows and arches. Many churches have Gothic architecture. Castles were also built at this time. In Eastern Europe, churches usually had domes. People added their own ideas and decoration to the Classical Architecture of the past. The Renaissance brought a return to classical ideas. 
In the late 18th century with the Industrial Revolution, people began to invent machines to make things quickly and cheaply. Many factories and mills were built during, or after this revolution. Decades later, in the Victorian era, architects like George Fowler Jones and Decimus Burton still followed the Gothic style to build new churches. Up to this point, buildings were limited in size and style by the strength of the wood and masonry used to construct them. Gothic cathedrals were among the largest buildings because the gothic arch when combined with buttresses allowed stone buildings to be built taller. For example, the cathedral in Ulm, Germany is over 500 feet tall. However, building with stone has its limits, and building too tall could result in collapse, an example of which is the Beauvais Cathedral, which was never completed. 
Towards the end of the 19th Century with a second Industrial Revolution, steel became much cheaper. Architects began to use inventions like metal girders and reinforced concrete to build. An example is the Eiffel Tower in Paris. Buildings can now be built taller than ever before. We call them skyscrapers. This new technology has made us free from traditional limitations, and because of the new possibilities presented by these materials, many traditional methods of construction and ideas about style were reevaluated, replaced, or abandoned. Cheap, strong glass soon brought transparent exterior walls, especially for office buildings. 
Modernism is the name for the architectural style which developed because of these new building technologies, and its beginnings can been seen as early as 1890. Modernism can also refer to a specific group of architects and buildings from the early to late 20th century, and so may not be the proper term to use for many building built since then, which are sometimes called "post-modern".
Many of the world's greatest structures were build by modern day architects such as Frank Lloyd Wright, I. M. Pei, Adrian Smith, Edward Durell Stone, Fazlur Khan, and Bruce Graham.

</doc>
<doc id="50" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50" title="Anatomy">
Anatomy

Anatomy is the study of the bodies of living beings. This can be people, animals, or plants. It is like taking the body apart, and looking at its parts (organs, muscles and bones). People who study "anatomy" then look where a certain organ (or bone, or muscle) should be, or where it normally is.
The history of anatomy dates back to 1600 BCE when Egyptians began studying human anatomy. They discovered the functions of many organs like the liver, spleen, kidneys, heart etc. and were the first to discover the structure and functions of the lymphatic system.
Academic human anatomists are usually employed by universities, medical schools or teaching hospitals. They are often involved in teaching anatomy, and research into certain systems, organs, tissues or cells.
Body Systems.
There are different systems, such as the cardiovascular system, also known as the circulatory system (the system that gets blood around the body), the muscular system (the system that contains muscles), the nervous system (the system that controls the nerves,and the brain) and the skeleton (the bones). 
Human anatomy, physiology and biochemistry are similar basic medical sciences.

</doc>
<doc id="51" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51" title="Asteroid">
Asteroid

An asteroid is a small object in the Solar System that travels around the Sun. It is like a planet but smaller. They range from less than 1 km (over 1000 feet) to 600 miles (1000 km) across. A few asteroids have asteroid moons.
The name "asteroid" means "like a star" in the ancient Greek language. Asteroids may look like small stars in the sky, but they really do move around the Sun, while stars only seem to move because the Earth spins. Like planets, asteroids do not make their own light. Because of this, some people think "asteroids" is not a good name, and think that the name "planetoid" ("like a planet") would be a better name.
Giuseppe Piazzi found the first asteroid, in 1801. It was named 1 Ceres, and is the biggest object in the asteroid belt. Other asteroids in the asteroid belt, like Juno, 2 Pallas, and 4 Vesta were found later. Today, astronomers using computerized telescopes find thousands of asteroids every month. 
Asteroids are the leftover rock and other material from the formation of the Solar System. These rocks were too small to make a planet, and could not collide but some are made of carbon or metal. Depending on what's on the surface, they are classified into various kinds in including Type M (metal), Type S (stone), and Type C (carbon).
Most asteroids in our Solar System are in the asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter. Many are not in the main asteroid belt. The ones that come close to Earth are called Near-Earth asteroids. Many scientists think asteroids striking the Earth killed off all the dinosaurs and caused some of the other extinction events.

</doc>
<doc id="52" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52" title="Afghanistan">
Afghanistan

Afghanistān (officially called Islamic Republic of Afghanistan; Pashto: د افغانستان اسلامي جمهوريت 
 
, Persian: جمهوری اسلامی افغانستان 
 
) is a country in South Asia. It has borders with Pakistan in the south and east, Iran in the west, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Tajikistan in the north, and China in the far northeast.
In early times people passed through it with animals and other goods as it connected China and India with Central Asia and the Middle East. More recently, Afghanistan has been damaged by many years of war and there not being enough jobs.
The country is around 251,826 square miles (652,230 square kilometers) in size or area. There are 30 million people in Afghanistan. There are about 3 million Afghan refugees (people who had to leave the country) who are in Pakistan and Iran for some time. Kabul, its capital, had about 3,691,400 people living in it in 2011.
Land and climate.
Afghanistan has many mountains. The mountains are called the Hindu Kush and Himalayas. The big mountain in Afghanistan is Mount Nowshak. There are plains (which have soil that is good for growing plants) and foothills. Part is also dry and called the Registan Desert.
Afghanistan has snow and glaciers in the mountains. Amu Darya is the big water stream, or river.
Afghanistan is dry and cold in winter and hot in summer. Having no water sometimes causes problems for farmers. Sandstorms happen a lot in the desert.
The country has a lot of a valuable stone called lapis lazuli, which was used to decorate the tomb of the Egyptian king Tutankhamun.
Plants and animals.
Southern Afghanistan has not many plants because it is dry. There are more plants where there is more water. Mountains have forests of pine and fir. cedar, oak, walnut, alder, and ash trees.
Afghanistan's animals are in the mountains. There are wolves, foxes, jackals, bears, and wild goats, gazelles, wild dogs, camels, and wild cats such as the snow leopard in the country. The birds are falcons, eagles and vultures. The Rhesus Macaque and the red flying squirrel are also in Afghanistan.
Many years of war, hunting, and years of no water have killed animals in Afghanistan. There used to be tigers in Afghanistan, but now there aren't any. Bears and wolves are almost gone.
People and culture.
Many different cultures have moved through or invaded the land of Afghanistan. Today the people of Afghanistan, known as "Afghans", have many traits passed down from these groups. The largest ethnic group (group of people considered the same in some or multiple ways) is the Pashtuns (or ethnic Afghans), who make up about half the Afghan people. Tajiks are the second-largest group, making up about one-fifth of the population. Before the 20th century, Tajiks were called Sarts and some come from the Iranian peoples. Most Pashtuns are also related to the Iranian peoples, and some Pashtuns and Tajiks marry each other but at the same time they are rivals. The country's other ethnic groups include the Hazara, Uzbek, Aimak, Turkmen, Nuristani, Baloch, Pashai and a few others. The Hazaras live in the mountains of central Afghanistan, many people believe that they have connection to the 13th century Mongol invaders, because their language has many Mongol words.
The language of the Pashtuns, called Pashto, is the first official language of Afghanistan. The second official language is Dari, Afghan dialect of Farsi (Persian). Most people who live in cities can speak more than one language. Dari is the native or mother language of the Tajik, Hazara, and some other ethnic groups. Both Pashto and Dari belong to the Indo-European languages, but they are usually written with the Arabic alphabet. Uzbek and Turkmen are widely spoken in the north and Nuristani and Pashai are spoken in the east. Almost all Afghans follow the religion of Islam.
Afghanistan is a largely rural country, which means that there are only few major cities and much spaced-apart land. Only about one fifth of the population lives in cities. Kabul, the capital, is the largest city. It is along the Kabul River south of the Hindu Kush range. Other cities in Afghanistan include Kandahar, Herat, Mazar-e Sharif, and Jalalabad. The rural population is made up of farmers and nomads (people who move or travel from place to place). The farmers live mainly in small villages along the rivers. The nomads live in tents while moving from place to place with their animals and belongings. Some Afghan people live in the high central mountains or the deserts in the south and southwest. Millions of people escaped from Afghanistan in order to not get involved in the wars that happened in the late 20th and early 21st centuries. Most of them lived in neighboring Pakistan and Iran.
History.
Afghanistan is in the path of important trade routes that connect southern and eastern Asia to Europe and the Middle East. Because of this, many empire builders have decided to rule over the area. Signs that these emperors were near Afghanistan still exist in many parts of the country. Afghanistan is near what used to be the Silk Road, so it has many cultures. From up to 8,000 years ago, the peoples of Afghanistan helped develop (create) major world religions, traded and exchanged many products, and sometimes controlled politics and culture in Asia.
Prehistory.
Archaeologists digging a cave in what is now northeastern Afghanistan (in Badakhshan), discovered that people lived in the country as early as 100,000 years ago. They found the skull of a Neanderthal, or early human, as well as tools from about 30,000 years ago. In other parts of Afghanistan, archaeologists uncovered pottery and tools that are 4,000 to 11,000 years old—evidence that Afghans were among the first people in the world to grow crops and raise animals. 
Farmers and herders settled in the plains surrounding the Hindu Kush as early as 7000 B.C. These people may have grown rich off the lapis lazuli they found along riverbeds, which they traded to early city sites to the west, across the Iranian plateau and Mesopotamia. As farms and villages grew and thrived in Afghanistan, these ancient people eventually invented irrigation (digging ditches for water so it flows to crops) that allowed them to grow crops on the northern Afghanistan desert plains. This civilization (advanced state of organization) is today called BMAC (Bactria–Margiana Archaeological Complex), or the "Oxus civilization".
The Oxus civilization expanded as far east as western edge of the Indus Valley during the period between 2200 and 1800 B.C. These people, who were the ancestors of the Indo-Aryans, used the term "Aryan" to identify their ethnicity, culture, and religion. Scholars know this when they read the ancient texts of these people; the Avesta of Iranian people and the Vedas of Indo-Aryans.
According to the Avesta, Aryans settled in sixteen districts in the area, beginning with "Airiana vaejo" (land of Aryans), and following with Bāxδī = Bactria or Balkh; Nisāya = a district between Margiana and Bactria; Harōiva = Areia or Herāt; Vaēkərəta = Gandhāra; Urvā = Ghazni region; Haraxᵛaitī = Arachosia or Kandahar; Haētumant = Helmand region; Raγa = a district north of Haraxᵛaitī and Haētumant; Čaxra = Čarx between Ghazni and Kabul, in the valley of Logar. The old Greek writers knew them and called the land of these Aryan settlers "Ariana".
Zoroaster, the founder of the Zoroastrian religion, the world's earliest monotheistic religion, (meaning a religion believing in one god) lived in the area (somewhere north of today's Afghanistan), around 1000 B.C.
Ancient history.
By the middle of the sixth century BC, the Achaemenids took over control of the land, which was previously held by the Medes, and made it part of the Persian empire. Alexander the great defeated and conquered the Persian Empire in 330 BC. He founded some cities in the area and Greek culture and language continued to influence the people for a long period, right up to the Islamic conquest in the 7th century A.D. After Alexander, Greco-Bactrians, Scythians, Kushans, Parthians and Sassanians ruled the area.
Kushans spread Buddhism from India in the 1st century B.C., and Buddhism remained an important religion in the area until the 7th century. The Buddhas of Bamiyan were the remainder of Buddhism in Afghanistan. Those giant statues were destroyed by the very religious Taliban in 2001, despite international protests in defence of the priceless art. The Taliban believed that those ancient statues were un-Islamic and a curse on Afghanistan.
Medieval history.
Arabs introduced Islam in the 7th century and slowly began spreading the new religion. In the 9th and 10th centuries, many local Islamic dynasties rose to power inside Afghanistan. One of the earliest was the Tahirids, whose kingdom included Balkh and Herat; they established independence from the Abbasids in 820. The Tahirids were succeeded in about 867 by the Saffarids of Zaranj in western Afghanistan. Local princes in the north soon became feudatories of the powerful Samanids, who ruled from Bukhara. From 872 to 999, north of the Hindu Kush in Afghanistan enjoyed a golden age under Samanid rule.
In the 10th century, the local Ghaznavids turned Ghazni into their capital and firmly established Islam throughout all areas of Afghanistan, except the Kafiristan region in the northeast. Mahmud of Ghazni, a great Ghaznavid sultan, conquered the Multan and Punjab region, and carried raids into the heart of India. Mohammed bin Abdul Jabbar Utbi (Al-Utbi), a historian from the 10th century, wrote that thousands of "Afghans" were in the Ghaznavid army. The Ghaznavid dynasty was replaced by the Ghorids of Ghor in the late 12th century, who reconquered Ghaznavid territory in the name of Islam and ruled it until 1206. The Ghorid army also included ethnic Afghans.
Afghanistan was recognized as "Khorasan", meaning "land of the rising sun," which was a prosperous and independent geographic region reaching as fast as the Indus River.
All the major cities of modern Afghanistan were centers of science and culture in the past. The New Persian literature arose and flourished in the area. The early Persian poets such as Rudaki were from what is now Afghanistan. Moreover, Ferdowsi, the author of Shahnameh, the national epic of Iran, and Rumi, the famous Sufi poet, were also from modern-day Afghanistan. It has produced scientists such as Avicenna, Al-Farabi, Al-Biruni, Omar Khayyám, Al-Khwarizmi, and many others who are widely known for their important contributions in areas such as mathematics, astronomy, medicine, physics, geography, and geology. It remained the cultural capital of Persia until the devastating Mongol invasion in the 13th century.
Timur, the Turkic conqueror, took over in the end of the 14th century and began to rebuild cities in this region. Timur's successors, the Timurids (1405–1507), were great patrons of learning and the arts who enriched their capital city of Herat with fine buildings. Under their rule Afghanistan enjoyed peace and prosperity.
Between south of the Hindu Kush and the Indus River (today's Pakistan) was the native land of the Afghan tribes. They called this land "Afghanistan" (meaning "land of the Afghans"). The Afghans ruled the rich northern Indian subcontinent with their capital at Delhi. From the 16th to the early 18th century, Afghanistan was disputed between the Safavids of Isfahan and the Mughals of Agra who had replaced the Lodi and Suri Afghan rulers in India. The Safavids and Mughals occasionally oppressed the native Afghans but at the same time the Afghans used each empire to punish the other. In 1709, the Hotaki Afghans rose to power and completely defeated the Persian Empire. Then they marched towards the Mughals of India and nominally defeated them with the help of the Afsharid forces under Nader Shah Afshar.
In 1747, after Nader Shah of Persia was killed, a great leader named Ahmad Shah Durrani united all the different Muslim tribes and established the Afghan Empire (Durrani Empire). He is considered the founding father of the modern state of Afghanistan while Mirwais Hotak is the grandfather of the nation.
Recent history.
During the 1800s, Afghanistan became a buffer zone between two powerful empires, British India and Russia. As British India advanced into Afghanistan, Russia felt threatened and expanded southward across Central Asia. To stop the Russian advance, British tried to make Afghanistan part of its empire but the Afghans fought wars with British-led Indians from 1839 to 1842 and from 1878 to 1880. After the third war in 1919, Afghanistan under King Amanullah gained respect and recognition as a completely independent state.
The Kingdom of Afghanistan was a constitutional monarchy established in 1926. It was the successor state to the Emirate of Afghanistan. On 27 September 1934, during the reign of Zahir Shah, the Kingdom of Afghanistan joined the League of Nations. During World War II, Afghanistan remained neutral. It pursued a diplomatic policy of non-alignment.
The creation of Pakistan in 1947 as its eastern neighbor created problems. In 1973, political crises led to the overthrow of the king. The country's new leader ended the monarchy and made Afghanistan a republic. In 1978, a Communist political party supported by the Soviet Union seized control of Afghanistan's government. This move sparked rebellions throughout the country. The government asked the Soviet Union for military assistance. The Soviets took advantage of the situation and invaded Afghanistan in December 1979.
Most people in Afghanistan opposed the sudden Soviet presence in their country. For nearly a decade, anti-Communist Islamic forces known as "Mujahideen" were trained inside neighboring Pakistan to fight the Soviets and the Afghan government. The United States and other anti-Soviet countries supported the Mujahideen. In the long war, over one million Afghan civilians were killed. The Soviet Army also lost more than 15,000 soldiers in that war. Millions of Afghans left their country to stay safe in neighboring Pakistan and Iran. In 1989 the Soviet Army withdrew the last of its troops.
After the Soviets left, different Afghan warlords began fighting for control of the country. The warlords received support from other countries, including neighboring Pakistan and Iran. A very conservative Islamic group known as the Taliban emerged in an attempt to end the civil war. By the late 1990s the Taliban had gained control over 95% of Afghanistan. A group known as the Northern Alliance, based in northern Afghanistan near the border with Tajikistan, continued to fight against the Taliban.
The Taliban ruled Afghanistan according to their strict version of Islamic law. People whom the Taliban believed violated these laws were given cruel punishments. In addition, the Taliban completely restricted the rights of women. Because of such policies, most countries refused to recognize the Taliban government. Only Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates (UAE) accepted them as the official government.
The Taliban also angered other countries by allowing suspected terrorists to live freely in Afghanistan. Among them were Osama bin Laden and members of the al-Qaeda terrorist network. In September 2001, the United States blamed bin Laden for the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center in New York City and the Pentagon outside Washington, D.C. The Taliban refused to hand him over to the United States. In response, the United States and its allies launched a bombing campaign against al-Qaeda in October 2001. Within months the Taliban abandoned Kabul and a new government led by Hamid Karzai came to power, but fighting between the Taliban and US-led armies continued. The Taliban are coming into Afghanistan from neighboring Pakistan, Afghans accuse Pakistan's military of being behind the Taliban militants but Pakistan has rejected this and stated that a stable Afghanistan is in Pakistan's own interest.
In December 2004, Hamid Karzai became the first democratically elected president of Afghanistan. NATO began rebuilding Afghanistan, including its military and government institutions. Many schools and colleges were built in the last ten years. Freedom for women improved, and they can now study, work, drive and run for offices. Many Afghan women work as politicians, some are ministers while at least one is a mayor. Others have opened businesses, or joined the military or police. Afghanistan's over-all economy has also improved dramatically and NATO states had agreed in 2012 to help the country for at least another 10 years after 2014. In the meantime, Afghanistan improved diplomatic ties with many countries in the world and continues to establish new ties with other states.
Government.
Afghanistan is a newly formed democracy. Under the new constitution, the president and two vice presidents are elected every five years. The International Security Force Assistance (ISAF) helps the government maintain peace and rebuild the country.
The government still faces problems with the Taliban, internal security, and public services.
Provinces.
As of 2004, there are thirty-four provinces. Each province is divided into districts. (For cities see List of cities in Afghanistan.)
References.
<noinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="53" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53" title="Angola">
Angola

Angola (officially called Republic of Angola) is a country in Africa. The capital is Luanda. Angola is in the south of the continent.
Angola is a member state of the African Union, the Community of Portuguese Language Countries, the Latin Union, South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone and the Southern African Development Community.
History.
There was a civil war from 1975 to 2002.
Geography.
Angola is the world's twenty-third largest country. Angola is bordered by Namibia to the south, Zambia to the east, the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the north-east, and the South Atlantic Ocean to the west.
Climate.
Angola's average temperature on the coast is 60 F in the winter and 70 F in the summer. It has two seasons; dry season (May to October) and hot rainy season (November to April).
Demographics.
Angola's population is estimated to be 18,498,000 (2009).
Provinces.
Angola is divided into eighteen provinces.
See List of settlements in Angola for the cities and towns in the country.

</doc>
<doc id="54" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54" title="Argentina">
Argentina

Argentina (officially called Argentine Republic) is a country in South America. Argentina is the second-largest country in South America and the eighth-largest country in the world. 
Spanish is the language most people speak and the official language, but many other languages are spoken. Some of these are German, Guarani, Mapudungun and Quechua and even Welsh in Patagonia.
The capital city of the Argentina is Buenos Aires, one of the largest cities in the world, in eastern Argentina. In order by number of people, the largest cities in Argentina are Buenos Aires, Córdoba, Rosario, Mendoza, La Plata, Tucumán, Mar del Plata, Salta, Santa Fe, and Bahía Blanca. 
Argentina is between the Andes mountain range in the west and the southern Atlantic Ocean in the east and south. It is bordered by Paraguay and Bolivia in the north, Brazil and Uruguay in the northeast, and Chile in the west and south. It also claims the Falkland Islands (Spanish: "Islas Malvinas") and South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands.
History.
The name Argentina comes from the Latin "argentum" (silver) as the Spanish conquistadors believed the area had silver. In the Americas, Canada, US, Brazil and Argentina are the largest countries (in that order).
The oldest signs of people in Argentina are in the Patagonia (Piedra Museo, Santa Cruz), and are more than 13,000 years old. In 1480 the Inca Empire conquered northwestern Argentina, making it part of the empire. In the northeastern area, the Guaraní developed a culture based on yuca and sweet potato however typical dishes all around Argentina are pasta, red wines (Italian influence) and beef.
Other languages spoken are Italian, English and German. Lunfardo is Argentinean slang and is a mix of Spanish and Italian. Argentineans are said to speak Spanish with an Italian accent.
Argentina declared independent from Spain in 1816, and achieved it in 1818. It grew a lot after immigrants from Europe came to the country. By the 1920s it was the 7th wealthiest country in the world, but it began a decline after this. In the 1940s, following the "infamous decade" where the country's politics were not stable, Juan Peron came to power. Peron was one of the most important people in the country's history and many politicians today call themselves Peronist. Peron was forced out of power in 1955. After spending years in exile he returned to power in the 1970s.
In 1976, the country was falling into chaos, and the military took power. This was not the first time the military had done this. Leading the new government was Jorge Rafael Videla. Videla was one of history's most brutal dictators. Thousands of people disappeared or were killed during his time as president. Videla retired in 1980.
One of his successors was another general turned dictator, Leopoldo Galtieri. By the time Galtieri was in office in 1981 the dictatorship became unpopular. To try to stir up support, Galtieri ordered an invasion of the Falkland Islands, starting a war. Argentina lost the war, and soon the country fell into chaos again. Galtieri was removed from power and eventually democracy was restored. Galtieri and Videla would be charged with "crimes against humanity" because of the mass murder and other crimes that they ordered as president.
Today, Argentina is one of the most important countries in Latin America, though it still has many problems facing it. It has a large economy and is an influential country in the "southern cone" of South America.
Politics.
Argentina is a federal republic. The people of Argentina vote for a President to rule them and Senators and Deputies to speak for them and make laws for them. The President is Cristina Fernández de Kirchner since December 2007.
Administrative divisions.
Argentina is divided into 23 provinces ("provincias"; singular: "provincia"), and 1 city (commonly known as "capital federal"):
Geography.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : Geography of Argentina
Argentina is almost 3,700 km long from north to south, and 1,400 km from east to west (maximum values). It can be divided into three parts: the Pampas in the central part of the country, Patagonia in the southern part down to Tierra del Fuego; and the Andes mountain range along the western border with Chile, with the highest point in the province of Mendoza. Cerro Aconcagua, at 6,960 metres (22,834 ft), is the Americas' highest mountain.
The most important rivers include the River Plate, Paraguay, Bermejo, Colorado, Uruguay and the largest river, the Paraná. River Plate was incorrectly translated though, and should have been translated to English as River of (the) Silver. River Plate is also a famous Buenos Aires soccer team.
See List of cities in Argentina for the many places people live in Argentina.
Other information.
The majority of the Argentineans are descendants of Europeans mainly from Spain, Italy, Germany, Ireland, France, other Europeans countries and Mestizo representing more than 90% of the total population of the country.
Football or soccer is the most popular sport, although the national sport of the country is Pato. Argentina has a number of highly-ranked Polo players. Field hockey (for women) rugby and golf are also favorites.
Argentina is a Christian country. Most of Argentina's people (80 percent) are Roman Catholic. Argentina also has the largest population of Jewish community after Israel and US. Many Middle Eastern immigrants who were Muslims converted to Catholicism, but there are still Muslims as well.
Medicine is socialized and so is education, making Argentina's literacy rate about 98%. State University is free as well.
Other websites.
 Find more information on Argentina by searching one of Wikipedia's :
 Dictionary definitions from Wiktionary<br>
 from Wikibooks<br>
 from Wikiquote<br>
 from Wikisource<br>
 from Commons<br>
 from Wikinews<br>
 from Wikiversity<br>
 from Wikispecies<br>
 from Wikidata<br>
 from MediaWiki

</doc>
<doc id="55" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55" title="Austria">
Austria

Austria (German: "Österreich" 
 
The people in Austria speak German, a few also Hungarian, Slovenian and Croatian. The capital of Austria is Vienna (Wien).
Austria is more than a thousand years old. Its history can be followed to the ninth century. At that time the first people moved to the land now known as Austria. The name "Ostarrichi" is first written in an official document from 996. Since then this word has developed into the Modern German word "Österreich," which literally means "East Kingdom."
Austria is a democratic state and has nine federal states (German: 'Bundesländer' 
 
): Vorarlberg, the Tyrol, Salzburg, Carinthia, Styria, Upper Austria, Lower Austria, Vienna and Burgenland. It is a neutral state, that means it does not take part in wars with other countries. Austria has been in the United Nations since 1955 and in the European Union since 1995.
History.
Ancient times.
There has been human settlement in the area that is now Austria for a long time. The first settlers go back to the Paleolithic age. That was the time of the Neanderthals. They left works of art such as the Venus of Willendorf. In the Neolithic age people were living there to dig for mineral resources, especially copper. Ötzi, a mummy found in a glacier between Austria and Italy, is from that time. In the Bronze Age people built bigger settlements and fortresses, especially where there were mineral resources. Salt mining began near Hallstatt. At that time, Celts began to form the first states.
The Romans.
The Roman cities and their modern names.
The Romans came 15 B.C. to Austria and made the Celtic Regnum Noricum to a province. Modern Austria was part of three provinces, Raetia, Noricum and Pannonia. The border in the north was the Danube.
Modern times.
Austria was the Austrian Empire from about 800 to 1918 and was ruled by The House of Habsburg for most of that period. Then it became a republic. The "First Republic" was from 1918 to 1938. From 1938 to 1945 Austria was part of Germany. The "Second Republic" was started in 1945.
Geography.
Austria is a largely mountainous country since it is partially in the Alps. The high mountainous Alps in the west of Austria flatten somewhat into low lands and plains in the east of the country where the Danube flows.
Culture.
Music and Arts.
Many famous composers were Austrians or born in Austria. There are Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, Joseph Haydn, Franz Schubert, Anton Bruckner, Johann Strauss, Sr., Johann Strauss, Jr. and Gustav Mahler. In modern times there were Arnold Schoenberg, Anton Webern and Alban Berg, who belonged to the Second Viennese School.
Austria has many artists, there are Gustav Klimt, Oskar Kokoschka, Egon Schiele or Friedensreich Hundertwasser, Inge Morath or Otto Wagner and scienc.
Food.
Famous Austrian dishes are Wiener Schnitzel, Apfelstrudel, Schweinsbraten, Kaiserschmarren, Knödel, Sachertorte and Tafelspitz. But you can also find a lot of local dishes like Kärntner Reindling, Tiroler Knödl or Salzburger Nockerl.

</doc>
<doc id="56" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56" title="Armenia">
Armenia

Armenia (officially called the Republic of Armenia) is a country in the western part of Asia. Its capital city is Yerevan. Armenia received its independence from the Soviet Union in 1991.
Armenia touches Turkey, Georgia, Azerbaijan, and Iran.
There are some minorities living in Armenia, such as Greek, Russian, and other minorities, and more than 90% of the people are ethnic Armenians. Also, the Armenian Apostolic Church, is by far the largest religion in the country. There is a small amount of other Christians, Muslims and atheists.
Armenia is the place that some Christians believe Noah's Ark landed, and Noah's family settled. The Armenian name for Armenia (Hayastan) means Land of Haik. Haik was the name of a great-great-grandson of Noah.
Throughout history, Armenia's size has changed many times. Today Armenia is much smaller than it was once. In 80 BCE, the Kingdom of Armenia covered parts of what is today Turkey, Syria, Lebanon, Iran, Iraq, Azerbaijan, and, of course, Armenia.
From 1920 to 1991, Armenia was a member of the Soviet Union.
Today, Armenia's borders are locked with Turkey and Azerbaijan, due to conflicts. In 1992, Armenia and Azerbaijan had a war over the land of Nagorno-Karabakh. The fighting stopped in 1994, and Armenia has had control over this land, but Azerbaijan still disputes about the land.
Geography.
Armenia is landlocked in the South Caucasus. It is between the Black and Caspian Seas. The country is bordered on the north and east by Georgia and Azerbaijan, and on the south and west by Iran and Turkey.
It covers an area of 29743 km2. The land is mostly mountains, with fast flowing rivers and few forests. There are hot summers and cold winters. 
Mount Ararat used to be part of Armenia. It is the highest mountain in the region. It is now in Turkey, but clearly visible in Armenia. The Armenians see it as a symbol of their land. Because of this, the mountain is present on the Armenian national emblem today.
Provinces.
Armenia is divided into ten provinces and the capital city of Yerevan. As of 2007, Armenia includes 915 communities. 49 are considered urban and 866 are considered rural. For a list of communities see List of settlements in Armenia.
Largest cities.
Armenia has many cities. Here is a list of the ten biggest ones:

</doc>
<doc id="57" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57" title="Archaeology">
Archaeology

Archaeology is the study of the past by looking for the remains and artifacts (historical things) left by the people who lived long ago. These remains can include old coins, tools, buildings, and garbage. Archaeologists, the people who study archaeology, use these remains to understand how people lived.
Archaeologists think it is important to understand the past, because so many people use the past to know where they come from. 
Fieldwork.
When archaeologists do fieldwork, they look for remains, often by digging deep in the ground. When things are found, or even when nothing is found, the results of the fieldwork are taken back to the place where the archaeologist's base is, maybe a university or museum. They record everything they found by writing down on paper or entering the information into a computer, so that they can build a picture of everything that is found. As settlements (places where people lived in groups) change and grow, old buildings are often buried to make space for new buildings. Ancient Rome, for example, is now up to 40 feet (12 metres) below the present city. This is why archaeological fieldwork is expensive and why it takes a long time.
Fields of interest.
Archaeologists do not all study the same civilizations, they specialize in different areas of interest. Some fields of interest include Ancient Egypt (these specialists are called Egyptologists), Ancient China, or the Vikings. Archaeologists study every civilization that is known, especially the ones where there is no written history. They can study any time period. For example, one might study the beginning of human life in Africa, or study World War II. Some archaeologists study things that are now underwater. They search for sunken ships or cities that have been lost under the sea.
Sites.
Stonehenge, in England, is a famous archaeological site, or place. Other famous sites include the Roman Forum, Angkor Wat, Machu Picchu, and Great Zimbabwe. In many countries, governments and other groups of people protect important sites so that they will not be destroyed and so that visitors can always come and see them.
Sometimes archaeological sites are found when foundations are dug for new buildings. Archaeologists have to work quickly when this happens, because people building often don't have a lot of time. Many times as soon as the archaeologists are done with their work, the remains that they have found will be covered over, unless they are very important.

</doc>
<doc id="58" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58" title="Application">
Application

The word application has several uses.
 
 

</doc>
<doc id="62" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62" title="Animal">
Animal

For the album, see Animals (album).
Animals are eukaryotic organisms with many cells. They do not use light to get energy and grow, as plants do. The study of animals is called zoology. Animals use different ways to get energy from other living things. They usually eat other living things, but some are parasites, or have photosynthetic protists as symbionts. 
Like plants, animals are multicellular eukaryotic organisms, but most animals are motile, meaning they can move around. Animals take in oxygen, and give out carbon dioxide. This is part of their metabolism (chemical working). In both these ways they are different from plants. Also, the cells of animals have different cell membranes to other eukaryotes like plants and fungi.
Grouping animals.
There are many types of animals. The common animals most people know are only about 3% of the animal kingdom. When biologists look at animals, they find things that certain animals have in common. They use this to group the animals in a biological classification.
Animals can mainly be divided into two main groups, the invertebrates, and the vertebrates. The vertebrates are animals with a backbone, or spine, and the invertebrates without. 
Vertebrates are:
Some invertebrates are:
Life styles.
The animal mode of nutrition is called heterotrophic because they get their food from other living organisms. Some animals eat only plants; they are called herbivores. Other animals eat only meat and are called carnivores. Animals that eat both plants and meat are called omnivores. 
The environments animals live in vary greatly. By the process of evolution, animals get adapted to the habitats they live in. Obviously, a fish is adapted to its life in water, and a spider is adapted to a life catching and eating insects. A mammal living on the savannahs of East Africa lives quite a different life from a mammal like a porpoise catching fish in the sea.
The fossil record of animals goes back about 600 million years to the Ediacaran period. During the whole of this long period of time animals have been constantly changing, so that the animals alive on Earth today are very different from those on the edges of the sea-floor in the Ediacaran. The study of ancient life is called palaeontology.

</doc>
<doc id="63" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63" title="Acceleration">
Acceleration

Acceleration is a measure of how fast velocity changes. Acceleration is the change of velocity divided by the change of time. Acceleration is a vector, and therefore includes both a size and a direction.
Finding acceleration.
Acceleration is the rate of change of the velocity of an object. Acceleration formula_1 can be found by using:
where
Sometimes the change in velocity formula_7 is written as Δformula_8. Sometimes the change in time formula_9 is written as Δt.
In difficult situations, the acceleration can be calculated using mathematics: in calculus, acceleration is the derivative of the velocity (with respect to time), formula_10.
Units of measurement.
Acceleration has its own units of measurement. For example, if velocity is measured in meters per second, and if time is measured in seconds, then acceleration is measured in meters per second squared (m/s2).
Other words.
Acceleration can be positive or negative. When the acceleration is negative (but the velocity does not change direction), it is sometimes called deceleration. For example, when a car brakes it decelerates. Physicists usually only use the word "acceleration".
Newton's second law of motion.
Newton's laws of motion are rules for how things move. These rules are called "laws of motion". Isaac Newton is the scientist who first wrote down the main laws of motion.
According to Newton's Second Law of Motion, the force something needs to accelerate an object depends on the object's mass (the amount of "stuff" the object is made from or how "heavy" it is).
The formula of Newton's Second Law of Motion is formula_11,
where formula_12 is the acceleration, formula_13 is the force, and formula_14 the mass. 
This formula is very well-known, and it is very important in physics. Newton's Second Law of Motion, in short "Newton's Second Law", is often one of the first things that physics students learn.
Deceleration.
Deceleration is the opposite of acceleration. This means that something slows down instead of speeding up. For example, when a car brakes, it is decelerating.

</doc>
<doc id="68" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68" title="Black pudding">
Black pudding

Black pudding is an English name for blood sausage. It is food made by cooking down the blood of any mammal (usually pigs or cattle) with meat, fat or filler until it is thick enough to congeal (become firm or solid) when cooled.
Types of Black pudding.
In England blood sausage is called "Black Pudding". The ingredients include pig's blood, suet, bread, barley and oatmeal. The most common kind of German "blutwurst" is made from fatty pork meat, beef blood and filler such as barley. Though already cooked and "ready to eat" it is usually served warm.
Other kinds of blood sausage include "boudin noir" (France), "boudin rouge" (Creole and Cajun) and "morcilla" (Spain).
History.
A legend says that blood sausage was invented in a bet between two Bavarian butchers drunk on the alcoholic drink absinthe during the 14th century. Homer's "Odyssey" from Ancient Greece says that "As when a man besides a great fire has filled a sausage with fat and blood and turns it this way and that and is very eager to get it quickly roasted...".
Other pages.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="69" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69" title="Boot device">
Boot device

A boot device is used to start a computer. It is named after a boot which fits on the foot. The word bootstrap is also closely related, and means, to use something simpler to get something more complex to make itself work better. It comes from the English phrase "pull yourself up by your own bootstraps."
Before a computer can operate normally, it must have operating system instructions that tell it how to perform basic functions. A boot device loads the operating system into the memory of the computer. 
Devices that can boot a computer are usually boot disks or boot drives 
(normally a hard drive, but can be a floppy disk or a CD). Some network computers use "boot chips" that get the operating system over a network. Web phones also use such chips to identify the user to the cell network. Boot card standards may let many users boot kiosk computers with full privacy and access to all applications they own. There are also boot boards or boot "add-in" cards that are more permanent than boot cards.
Some people refer to the boot device as just a boot and non-boot devices as data devices, although it is not the computer but the operating system that cares about the difference between these.
Origin.
The boot in boot device is the same as booting (or starting up). This is short for bootstrapping, or to start with simple stuff and make complex stuff out of it.

</doc>
<doc id="70" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70" title="Boot">
Boot

For the fictional character, see List of characters in Pirates of the Caribbean#Bootstrap Bill Turner.
A boot is a type of footwear that protects the foot and ankle. Boots are higher and larger than shoes and sandals. Some boots are high enough to protect the calves (lower part of the leg) as well. Some boots are held on with "bootstraps" or "bootlaces". Some also have spats or "gaiters" to keep water out. Most have a very strong "boot sole", the bottom part of a boot.
Other meanings.
People in English-speaking countries refer to boots in a figurative or joking manner when they tell someone "to lift yourself up by your own bootstraps". This is a joke because it is impossible for someone to lift themselves up by their own bootstraps. What the person is really saying is "figure out your problem yourself" or "find your own way to better your situation."
As well, people sometimes use the term to bootstrap. This is an idiom meaning "to use something simpler to get something more complex to make itself work better." The word "boot" is also used to describe how a computer starts up when a person presses the "on" button. 
Another term "To boot" is an idiom meaning also. For example, people say "he had a beer, and a whiskey to boot." This means that the person had a beer, and also had a glass of whiskey. Another slang use of the word "boot" is to say "Fred got the boot from the company." This means that Fred got fired from the company.

</doc>
<doc id="71" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71" title="Bankruptcy">
Bankruptcy

Bankruptcy is a legal process which happens when a person or an organisation does not have enough money to pay all of its debts. Legally they are insolvent. 
Where it is a person who cannot pay their debts, the person's creditors may ask the court to appoint a "trustee in bankruptcy". This is a professional accountant who is appointed by the court, and they will take control of the bankrupt person's assets. Some assets are protected by law, but the trustee in bankruptcy will sell off all of the other assets and use the proceeds to pay as much of that person's debts as possible. After the process is complete the person is "discharged from bankruptcy", and the person is free from any further liability to pay those claims, but normally that person will be limited in their ability to borrow money again because their credit rating will be damaged. 
Where it is an organisation who cannot pay their debts, the creditors may ask the court to appoint a "liquidator". The liquidator does a very similar job to the trustee in bankruptcy except that there are no assets which are protected so the liquidator can sell everything. Once all of the assets of the organisation have been sold, the organisation is then "dissolved" and no longer exists. Organisations do not get discharged from bankruptcy in the same way that a living person does. 
Insolvency or bankrupcy.
People often confuse the terms bankruptcy and insolvency, and sometimes they use one word when they really mean the other. Insolvency usually just means that a someone does not have enough money to pay their debts or (sometimes) that the total amount of their debts is worth more than the total amount of their assets. Bankruptcy is a formal legal process in front of the courts. Although the two terms are connected, just because a person is insolvent does not necessarily mean that they will go into bankruptcy. 
Alternatives to bankruptcy.
Many countries have alternatives to bankruptcy to try and allow people and businesses to try and avoid the bankruptcy process. 
In various countries, individual people can try and reach "individual voluntary arrangements" (or IVAs) with their creditors. This means that the creditors agree to take less money to discharge their debts. There are similar processes for companies and other organisations, and they go by various different names in different countries, but in many countries they are called "schemes of arrangement". 
Bankruptcy protection.
In many countries a company or business can ask the courts for "bankruptcy protection" to try and protect the business so that the creditors cannot destroy all of the physical capital and goodwill by breaking it apart and moving it away. The aim of this is provide is more time for the business to reorganise itself and to work out a new deal between the owners and the people the business owes money. In many countries this is called "going into administration", although in the United States it is usually referred as "going into Chapter 11". 
However not all countries have bankruptcy protection laws for businesses. 
Debt slavery.
Often a creditor threatens a debtor with debt slavery in many parts of the world. In some cases the debtor does not know that they have a right to go bankrupt. This is a human rights problem in some countries. Also, some creditors continue to harass a debtor even though bankruptcy laws say they should not, hoping that the debtor will pay them money that they do not deserve.
United States.
Chapter 7 of the Title 11 of the United States Code (Bankruptcy Code) can be filed by businesses or individuals. It is also called liquidation bankruptcy because some of a debtor's property may be sold (liquidated) to satisfy creditors. Chapter 13 is the most popular form of bankruptcy in the United States. When a business is in debt and cannot pay it, it may ask or be forced to file bankruptcy in court under Chapter 7. A chapter 7 usually makes a company stop doing business. Employees often lose their jobs when company files for chapter 7. When chapter 7 is filed, the trustee is chosen. The trustee is in charge of managing the business and selling its assets to pay the creditors.

</doc>
<doc id="74" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74" title="Breakfast sausage">
Breakfast sausage

Breakfast sausage is a type of fresh pork sausage made from seasoned ground meat mixed with bread crumbs. Breakfast sausage has a blander flavor than many other types of sausage, such as Polish or Italian-style sausages.
Using breakfast sausages.
Breakfast sausages are not cured or smoked like other types of sausages, which means that they have to be cooked soon after they are purchased (unless they are frozen). Uncooked sausages should be stored in the refrigerator or the freezer. Individuals handling them should wash their hands in hot soapy water, because uncooked pork is unhealthy for humans. Pork sausages have to be heated until all of the meat inside is cooked. 
They are usually fried or grilled in a pan until they are browned and served at breakfast, often with cooked eggs, pancakes, and toasted bread. Breakfast sausages are also used in other dishes, such as "toad in the hole" a cooked batter dish.
Types of breakfast sausages.
Different types made from pork and beef mixtures as well as poultry can now be found. There are also vegetarian types that use textured vegetable protein in place of meat. Breakfast sausages are available in patties or slices from a large roll, or in weiner-like links of different lengths and thickness.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="76" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76" title="Browser">
Browser

Not to be confused with :Web browser.
A browser is an animal, usually a herbivorous mammal, which eats leaves and shrubs rather than grass. It is contrasted with grazers, which eat grass.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="80" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=80" title="Beekeeping">
Beekeeping

Beekeeping or apiculture is the farming of honeybees.
Uses.
The keeping of bees is usually, and has been in the past, for honey. That is becoming less true. Instead, it is more used for crop pollination and other products. These are wax and propolis.
There is only one queen bee in each hive and she is bigger than the rest. She lays all the eggs, which makes all the other bees in the hive her daughters and sons. However, they do not control the hive.
Types of beekeeping.
The largest beekeeping operations are agricultural businesses that are operated for profit. Some people also have small beekeeping operations that they do as a hobby. Urban beekeeping is a growing trend, and some have found that "city bees" are actually healthier than "rural bees" because there are fewer pesticides and greater biodiversity.
Threats.
Colony Collapse Disorder is a growing problem, along with mites.
References.
Wikibooks has more about this subject:
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="83" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83" title="British English">
British English

British English is the kind of English language which is used in the United Kingdom, and in most countries which were in the British Empire.
Pronunciation in British English.
In the United Kingdom, many different people say words in different ways. For example: a man from a place near London may not say his "r"s the same as a man from Scotland or a man from Northern Ireland. Across the country the accent is different. For instance in Liverpool one speaks with a "scouse" accent or in London one speaks with a "cockney" accent. Different variations on all of British English exist from the manner in which words are pronounced to the manner in which they are spelt. One place people speak English in a different way is Cornwall, where the Cornish dialect is spoken. 
Other languages.
Britain, like other countries, has languages other than English. In Wales many speak Welsh; in Scotland some people speak Gaelic, and in Ireland a few people speak Irish. However, that is not the subject of this particular article.
Spelling in British English.
British English often keeps more traditional ways of spelling words than American English. 
Vocabulary in British English.
In British English, "dock" refers to the water in the space between two "piers" or "wharfs". In American English, the "pier" or "wharf" could be called a "dock", and the water between would be a "slip".
Some common differences:
British – American
Usage in different countries.
American English is only an official language in the United States. In Canada, American English spelling is often used. Although Commonwealth English is the most spoken, American English is seen more often on the internet. American English vocabulary dominates the visual media: "movies" (British: "films") and television.
All Commonwealth nations and Africa learn Commonwealth English, while American English is often learnt in the Americas and China. Z pronounced 'Zee' is only seen in the U.S.A and less commonly in Canada, while Z pronounced 'Zed' is spoken almost everywhere else. The United Kingdom and Ireland use British layout keyboards, while Australia, South Africa, Canada, New Zealand and the U.S.A use American layout keyboards. In continental Europe English as a second language is nowadays often American English, except perhaps in Scandinavia and Holland.

</doc>
<doc id="85" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=85" title="Being">
Being

The word being means a living person or animal. "Human being" means the same as "person". Men, women, and children are human beings.
Some people write stories or make movies about beings from other planets. Most religions talk about supernatural beings, for example spirits, angels, devils, gods, or God.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="89" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=89" title="Beijing">
Beijing

Template codice_1 has been incorrectly substituted.
Beijing (Chinese: 北京 
 
, Běijīng) is the capital of the People's Republic of China. The city used to be known as Peking. It is in the northern and eastern parts of the country.
The city of Beijing has played a very important role in the development of China. Many people from different cities and countries come to Beijing to look for better chances to find work. Nearly 15 million people live there. In 2008 Beijing hosted the Olympic Games.
Beijing is well known for its ancient history. Since the Jin Dynasty, Beijing has been the capital of several dynasties, including the Yuan, Ming, Qing, and others. There are many places of historic interest in Beijing. These places include the Summer Palace (Yìhéyuán), the Temple of Heaven (Tiāntán), and the Great Wall of China (Chángchéng).
What This Means.
Beijing means "the northern capital" in the Chinese language. It was once a counterpart of Nanjing, "the southern capital", during the Ming Dynasty. This dynasty gave Beijing its name. When the city does not serve as the capital city, the city reverts to its original name of Beiping, "northern peace"; this occurred between 1928 and 1949 when Nanjing was the capital of the Republic of China.
History.
The center of Beijing was settled in the 1st millennium BC. In those days, the Kingdom of Yan (燕, Yān) set up their capital where Beijing is today. They called it Ji (蓟, Jì). After the Kingdom of Yan was destroyed, the city became smaller, although it was still an important place.
Beijing became more important again in the 10th century, when the Jin dynasty set its capital there. This city was destroyed by Mongol forces in 1215. Then in 1267, Mongols built a new city on the north side of the Jin capital, and called it "Great Capital" (大都, Dàdū), which was the beginning of modern Beijing. When Kublai Khan the Mongolian monarch, set up the Yuan dynasty, this city became his capital.
The Yuan Dynasty, Ming Dynasty and Qing dynasty all made Beijing their capital. When the Qing dynasty lost power and the Republic of China was set up, the new Republic moved its capital from Beijing to Nanjing. When the People's Republic of China seized power, Beijing became the capital of China again.
In 1989, there were protests in Tian'anmen Square because some people wanted democracy.
Education.
Beijing is the education center of People's Republic of China. More than 500 famous universities of China are in Beijing. They also include 5 of the top universities: Peking University, Tsinghua University, China People University, Beijing Normal University and Beihang University. Beijing is also education center of China for teaching Chinese as a foreign language. The standard Chinese pronunciation is based on Beijing dialect, so over 70% foreigners who want to study Chinese go to Beijing for their studies.

</doc>
<doc id="90" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=90" title="Bottle">
Bottle

A bottle is a container used to carry liquids. Bottles can have many different sizes. Bottles are usually made of glass or plastic. Usually, Beer bottles are made of glass, and soft drinks are made of plastic.
Milk, wine, lemonade, and water are often put into bottles.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="91" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=91" title="Berry">
Berry

The word berry is used for many different kinds of small fruits that have many seeds and can be used as food. Some examples are strawberry,raspberry, blueberry and lingonberry.
When botanists talk about "berries", they mean a simple fruit produced from a single ovary. They sometimes call this "true berry", to distinguish it from "false berries". By that statement of how words are used, grapes or tomatoes are true berries.
The berry is the most common type of soft fruit in which the entire ovary wall gets to the right stage of development of the pericarp which can be taken as food. The flowers of these plants have a upper ovary with one or more carpels. The seeds are inside the soft body of the ovary.
Berries are small, sweet, bright colored fruits. Due to this, they are able to bring more animals towards them and spread their seeds.
Some fruits that are called "berries" in English are not "true berries" by the use of words above. These include strawberries, blackberries, raspberries and boysenberries. Some true berries do not have "berry" in their name. These include tomatoes, eggplants, cranberries, guavas, pomegranates and chillies. Pumpkins, cucumbers, melons, oranges and lemons are also berries that have slightly different structure and may be called by different names (pepo for pumpkins, cucumbers, and melons, or hesperidium for oranges and lemons).
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="93" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=93" title="Boil">
Boil

Boil might mean:
 
 

</doc>
<doc id="94" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=94" title="Beard">
Beard

A beard is the hair growing on the lower part of a man's face.
The hair that grows on the upper lip of some men is a mustache. When a man has hair only below the lower lip and above the chin, it is called a soul patch. Some men have a lot of hair and a big beard, and some have very little. In the modern world, many men shave part or all of their beards, or cut their beard so it does not get very long. Women can also have beards, but it is less common. 
Some animals also have hair like this, and people sometimes also call this hair a beard. 
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="98" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=98" title="Black">
Black

In light, black is lack of all color. In painting, however, the black pigment is the combination of all colors. In heraldry, black is called "sable".
Origin of "black".
The word black comes from Old English blæc ("black, dark", also, "ink"), from Proto-Germanic *blakkaz ("burned"), and from Proto-Indo-European *bhleg-. In many languages, "black" has the same meaning as "ink".
Black in science.
In science, an object that is black absorbs the light that hits it. Because these objects do not reflect any light, the human eye can't see any color coming from that object. The brain then sees these objects as black.
A way to create black objects is to mix pigments. A pigment works by reflecting only the color of the pigment. For example, a blue pigment absorbs all colors except blue. By mixing pigments in the right quantities, black can be made.
Because black objects absorb light, they become warmer faster.
Meaning of black.
Black is associated with power, elegance, formality, anarchy, death, evil, and mystery. Black is a dark color, the darkest color there is. Black, along with gray and white, is a "neutral" color. This means that it is not a "hot" color or a "cool" color.
Black is a color seen with fear and the unknown (black holes). It can have a bad meaning (blacklist, 'black death', black cat) or a good meaning ('in the black', 'black is beautiful'). Black can stand for strength and power. It can be a formal, elegant, and high-class color (black tie, black Mercedes, black taco). Black clothing is common in emo and goth subculture.

</doc>
<doc id="100" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=100" title="Bubonic plague">
Bubonic plague

Bubonic plague is the best-known form of the disease plague, which is caused by the bacterium Yersinia pestis. The name "bubonic plague" is specific for this form of the disease, which enters through the skin, and travels through the lymphatic system. 
If the disease is left untreated, it kills about half its victims, in between three and seven days. The bubonic plague was the disease that caused the Black Death, which killed tens of millions of people in Europe, in the Middle Ages.
Symptoms of this disease include coughing, fever, and black spots on the skin.
Different kinds of the same disease.
There are different kinds of Bubonic plague. The most common form of the disease is spread by a certain kind of flea, that lives on rats. Then there is an incubation period which can last from a few hours to about seven days. 
Septicemic plague.
Sepsis happens when the bacterium enters the blood and make it form tiny clots.
Pneumonic plague.
This happens when the bacterium can enter the lungs. About 95% of all people with this form will die. Incubation period is only one to two days.
The abortive form.
This is the most harmless form. It will result in a little fever. After that, there are antibodies that protect against all forms for a long time.
History.
During the 1300s, this epidemic struck parts of Asia, North Africa, and Europe. Almost a third of the people in Europe died of it. Unlike catastrophes that pull communities together, this epidemic was so terrifying that it broke people's trust in one another. Giovanni Boccaccio, an Italian writer of the time, described it: "This scourge had implanted so great a terror in the hearts of men and women that brothers abandoned brothers, uncles their nephews, sisters their brothers, and in many cases wives deserted their husbands. But even worse... fathers and mothers refused to nurse and assist their own children."
Transmission.
The plague was not just carried by rats as some people assume. The fleas also carried it. It came abroad from Kaffa by the Black Sea. From there the disease started to go new places in 1347. It went to England in 1349. There it killed half of the people in England. 70% of people who got plague died. Pigs are also to blame for the transmission, as the bacteria stayed in their blood system, and when eaten, people caught the plague. This is a reason why so few Jews or Muslims caught the disease.
Modern history.
In the 20th century, some countries did research on the bacteria that causes bubonic plague. They did research to use it for biological warfare.
Samples of this bacteria are carefully controlled. There is much paranoia (fear) about it. Dr. Thomas C. Butler, a US expert in this organism was charged in October 2003 by the FBI with various crimes. This happened after he said he lost samples of "Yersinia pestis". This is the bacteria that causes bubonic plague. The FBI did not find the samples. They do not know what happened to them.

</doc>
<doc id="101" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=101" title="Biology">
Biology

Biology is the science of life and living things, and their evolution. Living things include plants, animals, fungi (such as mushrooms), and microorganisms such as bacteria and archaea.
People who study biology are called biologists. Biology looks at how animals and other organisms behave and work, and what they are like. Biology also studies how organisms react with each other and the environment. It has existed as a science for about 200 years, and was preceded by natural history. Biology has many research fields and branches. Like all sciences, biology uses the scientific method. This means that biologists must be able to show evidence for their ideas, and that other biologists must be able to test the ideas for themselves.
Biology attempts to answer questions such as:
"What are the characteristics of this living thing?" (comparative anatomy);
"How do the parts work?" (physiology);
"How should we group living things?" (classification, taxonomy);
"What does this living thing do?" (behaviour, growth);
"How does inheritance work? (genetics); "What has been the history of life?" (palaeontology). How do organisms relate to their environment? (ecology). All modern biology is influenced by evolution, which answers the question: "How has the living world come to be as it is?"

</doc>
<doc id="102" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=102" title="Botany">
Botany

Botany is the study of plants. It is a science. It is a branch of biology, and is also called plant biology. It is sometimes called phytology. Scientists who study botany are called botanists. They study how plants work.
Notable botanists.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="103" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=103" title="Belgium">
Belgium

Belgium, officially the Kingdom of Belgium, is a federal state in Western Europe. It is a founding member of the European Union. It has the headquarters of the European Union, NATO and some other famous organisations. The capital city of Belgium is Brussels. Belgium has an area of 30528 km2. There are about 11 million people.
There are three regions in Belgium: Flanders (where the Flemish speak Dutch) in the northern half of Belgium, Wallonia (where most people speak French) in the southern half and the Brussels-Capital Region in the middle (where French is mostly spoken, with some Dutch).
The population is about 60% Dutch-speaking and 39% French-speaking, with a few German-speaking towns on the border with Germany. To look after both groups, Belgium has a complicated system of government.
History.
The name 'Belgium' comes from "Gallia Belgica". This was a Roman province in the northernmost part of Gaul. Before Roman invasion in 100 BC, the "Belgae", a mix of Celtic and Germanic peoples, lived there. The Germanic Frankish tribes during the 5th century brought the area under the rule of the Merovingian kings. A slow shift of power during the 8th century led the kingdom of the Franks to change into the Carolingian Empire. The Treaty of Verdun in 843 divided the region into Middle and West Francia. They were vassals either of the King of France or of the Holy Roman Emperor.
Many of these fiefdoms were united in the Burgundian Netherlands of the 14th and 15th centuries.
The Eighty Years' War (1568–1648) divided the Low Countries into the northern United Provinces and the Southern Netherlands. Southern Netherlands were ruled by the Spanish and the Austrian Habsburgs. This made up most of modern Belgium. 
After the , the Low Countries were added into the French First Republic. This ended Austrian rule in the area. Adding back the Low Countries formed the United Kingdom of the Netherlands. This happened at the end of the First French Empire in 1815.
The Belgian Revolution was in 1830. Leopold I became king on 21 July 1831. This is now celebrated as Belgium's National Day. 
The Berlin Conference of 1885 gave control of the Congo Free State to King Leopold II. This was for him personally and not for the country of Belgium. Starting in about 1900 many people did not like how he treated the Congolese people. In 1908 the Belgian state took control of the colony. It was then called the Belgian Congo. 
Germany invaded Belgium in 1914. This was part of World War I. The opening months of the war were very bad in Belgium. During the war Belgium took over the of Ruanda-Urundi (modern day Rwanda and Burundi). After the First World War, the Prussian districts of Eupen and Malmedy were added into Belgium in 1925. The country was again invaded by Germany in 1940 and under German control until 1944. After World War II, the people made king Leopold III leave his throne in 1951. This is because they thought he helped the Germans. 
In 1960 the Belgian Congo stopped being under Belgian rule. Two years later Ruanda-Urundi also became free. Belgium joined NATO as a founding member. 
Government and Politics.
Belgium has a system of government known as a constitutional monarchy, meaning that it has a monarch, but that the monarch does not rule the country, and that a government is elected democratically.
Belgium has had its own monarchy since 1831. King Albert II left the throne on July 21, 2013 and the current king is Philippe.
In Belgium, the government is elected. Between mid-2010 and late 2011, after no clear result in the election, Belgium had no official government, until Elio Di Rupo became Prime Minister. Flanders and Wallonia both also have their own regional governments, and there is a notable independence movement in Flanders. Charles Michel is currently the Prime Minister.
Geography.
Belgium is next to France, Germany, Luxembourg and the Netherlands. Its total area is 33,990 square kilometers. The land area alone is 30,528 km². Belgium has three main geographical regions. The coastal plain is in the north-west. The central plateau are part of the Anglo-Belgian Basin. The Ardennes uplands are in the south-east. The Paris Basin reaches a small fourth area at Belgium's southernmost tip, Belgian Lorraine.
The coastal plain is mostly sand dunes and polders. Further inland is a smooth, slowly rising landscape. There are fertile valleys. The hills have many forests. The plateaus of the Ardennes are more rough and rocky. They have caves and small, narrow valleys. Signal de Botrange is the country's highest point at 694 metres (2,277 ft).
Provinces.
Belgium is divided into three Regions. Flanders and Wallonia are divided into provinces. The third Region, Brussels is not part of any province.
Military.
The Belgian Armed Forces have about 46,000 active troops. In 2009 the yearly defence budget was $6 billion. There are four parts: Belgian Land Component, or the Army; Belgian Air Component, or the Air Force; Belgian Naval Component, or the Navy; Belgian Medical Component.
Science and technology.
Adding to science and technology has happened throughout the country's history. cartographer Gerardus Mercator, anatomist Andreas Vesalius, herbalist Rembert Dodoens and mathematician Simon Stevin are among the most influential scientists.
Chemist Ernest Solvay and engineer Zenobe Gramme gave their names to the Solvay process and the Gramme dynamo in the 1860s. Bakelite was formed in 1907–1909 by Leo Baekeland. A major addition to science was also due to a Belgian, Georges Lemaître. He is the one who made the Big Bang theory of the start of the universe in 1927.
Three Nobel Prizes in Physiology or Medicine were awarded to Belgians: Jules Bordet in 1919, Corneille Heymans in 1938 and Albert Claude together with Christian De Duve in 1974. Ilya Prigogine was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1977. Two Belgian mathematicians have been awarded the Fields Medal: Pierre Deligne in 1978 and Jean Bourgain in 1994.
In February 2014, Belgium became the first country in the world to legalize euthanasia without any age limits.
Culture.
Fine arts.
There have been many additions to painting and architecture. Several examples of major architectural places in Belgium belong to UNESCO's World Heritage List. In the 15th century the religious paintings of Jan van Eyck and Rogier van der Weyden were important. The 16th century had more styles such as Peter Breughel's landscape paintings and Lambert Lombard's showing of the antique. The style of Peter Paul Rubens and Anthony van Dyck was strong in the early 17th century in the Southern Netherlands. 
During the 19th and 20th centuries many original romantic, expressionist and surrealist Belgian painters started. These include James Ensor and other artists in the Les XX group, Constant Permeke, Paul Delvaux and René Magritte. The sculptor Panamarenko is still a remarkable figure in contemporary art. The artist Jan Fabre and the painter Luc Tuymans are other internationally known figures in contemporary art. 
Belgian contributions to architecture were also in the 19th and 20th centuries. Victor Horta and Henry van de Velde were major starters of the Art Nouveau style.
In the 19th and 20th centuries, there were major violinists, such as Henri Vieuxtemps, Eugène Ysaÿe and Arthur Grumiaux. Adolphe Sax invented the saxophone in 1846. The composer César Franck was born in Liège in 1822. Newer music in Belgium is also famous. Jazz musician Toots Thielemans and singer Jacques Brel have made global fame. In rock/pop music, Telex, Front 242, K's Choice, Hooverphonic, Zap Mama, Soulwax and dEUS are well known. In the heavy metal scene, bands like Machiavel, Channel Zero and Enthroned have a worldwide fan-base.
Belgium has several well-known authors, including the poet Emile Verhaeren and novelists Hendrik Conscience, Georges Simenon, Suzanne Lilar and Amélie Nothomb. The poet and playwright Maurice Maeterlinck won the Nobel Prize in literature in 1911. "The Adventures of Tintin" by Hergé is the best known of Franco-Belgian comics. Many other major authors, including Peyo, André Franquin, Edgar P. Jacobs and Willy Vandersteen brought the Belgian cartoon strip industry a worldwide fame.
Belgian cinema has brought a number of mainly Flemish novels to life on-screen. Belgian directors include André Delvaux, Stijn Coninx, Luc and Jean-Pierre Dardenne. Well-known actors include Jan Decleir and Marie Gillain. Successful films include "Man Bites Dog" and "The Alzheimer Affair". 
Cuisine.
Belgium is famous for beer, chocolate, waffles and french fries. French fries were first made in Belgium. The national dishes are "steak and fries with salad", and "mussels with fries".
Other local fast food dishes include a Mitraillette. Brands of Belgian chocolate and pralines, like Côte d'Or, Guylian, Neuhaus, Leonidas, Corné and Galler are famous. Belgium makes over 1100 varieties of beer. The Trappist beer of the Abbey of Westvleteren has repeatedly been rated the world's best beer. The biggest brewer in the world by volume is Anheuser-Busch InBev, based in Leuven.
Sports.
Since the 1970s, sports clubs are organised separately by each language community. Association football is one of the most popular sports in both parts of Belgium, together with cycling, tennis, swimming and judo. With five victories in the Tour de France and many other cycling records, Belgian Eddy Merckx is said to be one of the greatest cyclists of all time. Jean-Marie Pfaff, a former Belgian goalkeeper, is said to be one of the greatest in the history of football (soccer). Belgium and The Netherlands hosted the UEFA European Football Championship in 2000. Belgium hosted the 1972 European Football Championships.
Kim Clijsters and Justine Henin both were Player of the Year in the Women's Tennis Association. The Spa-Francorchamps motor-racing circuit hosts the Formula One World Championship Belgian Grand Prix. The Belgian driver, Jacky Ickx, won eight Grands Prix and six 24 Hours of Le Mans. Belgium also has a strong reputation in motocross. Sporting events held each year in Belgium include the Memorial Van Damme athletics competition, the Belgian Grand Prix Formula One, and a number of classic cycle races such as the Tour of Flanders and Liège–Bastogne–Liège. The 1920 Summer Olympics were held in Antwerp.
Other websites.
 Media related to at Wikimedia Commons

</doc>
<doc id="104" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=104" title="Brazil">
Brazil

For the city in the U.S. state of Indiana, see Brazil, Indiana.
Brazil (officially called Federative Republic of Brazil; how to say: IPA: [bɾɐˈziw]) is a country in South America. It is the world's fifth largest country. The country has about 201 million people. The capital of Brazil is Brasília. Brazil was named after brazilwood. Brazilwood is a tree that once grew very well along the Brazilian coast.
History.
The first people to come to Brazil came around 9,000 B.C. That group of people is often called the South American Indians. They probably came from North America. Some of them were hunters and gatherers, but others were farmers.
Pedro Álvares Cabral was the first European to see Brazil. He saw it in 1500. He was from Portugal and the Portuguese government claimed Brazil. Soon, explorers explored the whole coastline of Brazil and colonies were set up. In the late 1500s and early 1600s the Dutch and the French would sometimes try to take land in Brazil. Brazilians started moving inland farther than the Treaty of Tordesillas said they could. This caused some fights with the Spaniards and native people in the area.
In 1822, Brazil claimed to be its own country and not a part of Portugal anymore. Soon there was civil war. But the emperor Pedro II improved the economy, and in 1888, he freed the slaves. In 1889, there was a military coup and Pedro II had to leave the country.
In 1889, Brazil became a republic. It was not very democratic, because the only people who could vote were people who owned land. There were some uprisings in the 1920s because some people thought the government was unfairly helping coffee growers. Brazil joined the Allies during World War II.
During the 1960s, the leader Castelo Branco made the government like a dictatorship. Since then, the country has become more democratic, but some people feel that there are still big problems in health and education. Brazil will be hosting the 2016 olympics.
Languages.
Most people in Brazil speak Portuguese. Brazil is the only country in Latin America that speaks Portuguese.
Some people in Brazil speak German dialects. That came from German immigrants. 0.8% of Brazilians speak German as their first language.
Other people in Brazil speak indigenous Brazilian languages, Italian, Japanese, French, or Spanish. Guaraní and Aymará are the first languages of a small number of Brazilians.
Geography.
Brazil has the world's largest rainforest, the Amazon Rainforest. It makes up 40% of the country's land area. Brazil also has other types of land, including a type of savanna called "cerrado", and a dry plant region named "caatinga".
The most important cities are Brasília (the capital), Belém, Belo Horizonte, Curitiba, Florianópolis, Fortaleza, Goiânia, Manaus, Porto Alegre, Recife, Rio de Janeiro, Salvador, São Paulo (the biggest city) and Vitória. Other cities are at List of largest cities in Brazil.
Brazil is divided into 26 states plus the Federal District in five regions (north, south, northeast, southeast and centre-west):
The country is the fifth largest in the world by area. It is known for its many rainforests and jungles. It is next to every country in South America except Chile and Ecuador.
People/culture.
Brazil is the largest country in South America and the largest economy in Latin America. Its people include people of Portuguese or other European descent, African descent, and native Amerindians, as well as many people of mixed origins. Brazil also has the biggest number of Japanese descendents outside Japan. 
People from Brazil are called "Brazilians" ("brasileiros" in Brazilian Portuguese language).

</doc>
<doc id="105" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=105" title="Britain">
Britain

Great Britain<br>This page is a .<br>

</doc>
<doc id="108" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=108" title="Chemistry">
Chemistry

Chemistry is a branch of science that deals with chemical elements and compounds, and how these things work together. It is the study of the materials (things) that make up our bodies and everything in the world around us.
History.
Before 1600, people studied substances to figure out how to do things such as turn lead into gold, but no one managed to do that. This was called alchemy. Alchemists (people that did alchemy) did discover some useful things, though. Sulphuric acid and nitric acid were two substances that they discovered.
Only a few elements were known. Some of them are mercury, silver, gold, and carbon.
Chemistry began as a true science during the 1600s. This is when chemists discovered the simplest substances that make up all other substances. These simple substances are called elements. One of the things that they learned is that gold and lead are two different elements, so you can not change one into the other by a chemical reaction. The first element discovered after 1600 was phosphorus, a strange white glowing solid.
Elements were discovered more and more rapidly. People separated the air into many parts and isolated the noble gases from it. They also processed special minerals from a mine in Sweden to get rare earth metals. Radioactivity was also discovered. Today chemists have discovered 118 different elements. Some are very common, like oxygen. Many are very rare and expensive, like platinum. Some cannot be found on earth and can only be made in labs, like rutherfordium.
Since the 1920s, the increased understanding of physics has changed chemists' theories about chemical reactions. With smaller and faster computers, chemists have built better tools for analyzing substances. These tools have been sent to study chemicals on Mars. Police also use those tools to study evidence from crime scenes.
Types of chemistry.
There are several types of chemistry. Analytical chemistry looks at which chemicals are in things. For example, looking at how much arsenic is in food. Organic chemistry looks at things that have carbon in them. For example, making acetylene. Inorganic chemistry looks at things that do not have carbon in them. One example is making an integrated circuit.
A large area of chemistry is polymer chemistry. This looks at plastics. One example is making nylon. Because plastics are made of carbon, polymer chemistry is part of organic chemistry. Another area is biochemistry. This looks at the chemistry of living things. An example would be seeing how arsenic poisons people. Biochemistry is also part of organic chemistry. There are many other small branches of chemistry.
Concepts of chemistry.
Basic concepts.
The basic unit of an element is called an atom. An atom is the smallest building block that you can cut an element into without the element breaking down (turning into a lighter element, for example through nuclear fission or radioactive decay). A chemical compound is a substance made up of two or more elements. In a compound, two or more atoms are joined together to form a molecule. The tiniest speck of dust or drop of liquid, that one can see is made up of many millions or billions of these molecules. Mixtures are substances where chemicals are mixed but not reacted. An example would be mixing sand and salt. This can be undone again to produce salt and sand separately. Chemical compounds are changed by a chemical reaction. An example would be heating sodium bicarbonate, common baking soda. It will make water, carbon dioxide, and sodium carbonate. This reaction cannot be undone.
Mole.
A mole is a very large amount of atoms (602,214,150,000,000,000,000,000 atoms). The atomic mass of an element can be used to see how much of the element makes a mole. For example, the atomic mass of copper is about 63.55. That means about 63.55 grams of copper metal has a mole of atoms. The atomic mass of chlorine is about 35.45. That means 35.45 grams of chlorine has a mole of atoms in it.
Moles can be used to see how many molecules are in chemical compounds, too. Copper(II) chloride is an example. CuCl2 is its chemical formula. There is one copper atom (63.55) and two chlorine atoms (35.45 · 2 = 70.90). Add all the molar masses of the elements together and the molar mass of the chemical compound is gotten. (63.55 + 70.90 = 134.45) That means in 134.45 grams of copper(II) chloride, there is one mole of copper(II) chloride molecules. This concept is used to calculate how much chemicals are needed in a chemical reaction if no reactants (chemicals that are reacted) should be left. If too much reactant is used, there will be some reactants left in the chemical reaction.
Acids and bases.
Acids and bases are common chemicals. Acids release H+ ions when in water, and bases release OH− ions when in water. Acids can react with bases. The H+ ion is taken from the acid by the base. This makes water, H2O. A salt is also made when an acid and a base react together. An example would be reacting hydrochloric acid (HCl) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH). Hydrochloric acid releases H+ and Cl- ions in water. The base releases Na+ and OH- ions. The H+ and the OH- react to make water. There is a solution of sodium chloride (NaCl) left. Sodium chloride is a salt. 
Usefulness.
Chemistry is very useful in everyday life and makes up the foundation of many branches of science. Most objects are made by chemists (people who do chemistry). Chemists are constantly working to find new and useful substances. Chemists make new drugs and materials like paints that we use every day.
Safety.
Many chemicals are harmless, but there are some chemicals that are dangerous. For example, mercury(II) chloride is very toxic. Chromates can cause cancer. Tin(II) chloride pollutes water easily. Hydrochloric acid can cause bad burns. Some chemicals like hydrogen can explode or catch fire. To stay safe, chemists experiment with chemicals in a chemical lab. They use special equipment and clothing to do reactions and keep the chemicals contained. The chemicals used in drugs and in things like bleach have been tested to make sure they are safe if used correctly.

</doc>
<doc id="109" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=109" title="Compound">
Compound

 
 

</doc>
<doc id="110" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=110" title="Computer science">
Computer science

Computer science is the study of how to manipulate, manage, transform and encode information. 
There are many different areas in computer science. Some of the areas consider problems in an abstract way. Some areas need special machines, called computers.
A person who works with computers will often need mathematics, science, and logic in order to make and use computers.
Common tasks for a computer scientist.
Asking questions.
This is so that they can find new and easier ways to do things, and the way to approach problems with this information.
Asking the right question.
Computers can do some things easily (for example: simple math, or sorting out a list of names from A-to-Z). But computers cannot answer questions when there is not enough information, or when there is no real answer. Also, computers may take too much time to finish long tasks. For example, it may take too long to find the shortest way through all of the towns in the USA - so instead a computer will try to make a close guess. A computer will answer these simpler questions much faster.
Answering the question.
Algorithms are steps of instructions describing how to complete a task, such as solving a problem. Think about playing cards, for example. A computer scientist wants to sort the cards. First he wants to sort them out by color. Then he wants to order them by number (2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, Jack, Queen, King, and Ace). The computer scientist may see different ways to sort the playing cards. He must now think about of how he will do it. When he decides, he has created an algorithm. After making the algorithm, the scientist needs to test whether the algorithm always does what it should. Then, the scientist can see how well his program sorts the cards.
A simple but very slow algorithm could be: drop the cards, pick them up, and check whether they are sorted. If they are not, do it again. This method will work, but it will often take a very long time.
A person may do this better by looking through all the cards, finding the first card (2 of diamonds), and putting it at the start. After this, he looks for the second card, and so on. This works much faster, and does not need much space. This sorting algorithm is a selection sort.
Computer science began during World War II and separated from the other sciences during the 1960s and 1970s. Now, computer science uses special methods of doing things, and has its own special words. It is related to electrical engineering, mathematics, and language science.
Computer science looks at the theoretical parts of computers. Computer engineering looks at the physical parts of computers (hardware), and software engineering looks at the use of computer programs and how to make them.

</doc>
<doc id="112" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=112" title="Computer">
Computer

Template codice_1 has been incorrectly substituted.
A computer is a machine that is able to take information (input), do some work on or make changes to the information, to make new information (output). Computers have existed for much of human history. Examples of early computers are the astrolabe and the abacus. 
Modern computers are very different from early computers. They are now very powerful machines that are able to do billions of calculations every second. Most people have used a personal computer in their home or at work. Computers are useful for many different jobs where automatic tasks are useful. Some examples are controlling traffic lights, vehicle computers, security systems, washing machines and digital televisions.
A person (called a user) can control a computer by telling it to do things. Some ways of controlling a computer are with a keyboard, mouse, buttons, touch screen. Some very new computers can also be controlled with voice commands or hand gestures. 
Computers can be designed to do anything with information. Computers are used to control factories, which in the past were controlled by humans. They are also in homes, where they are used for things such as listening to music, reading the news, and writing.
Modern computers are electronic machines. A computer is only useful if it has both hardware and software. Hardware is the physical parts the computer is made of - for example keyboard, mouse, screen, tower, and the circuits inside it. Software is the computer programs (mathematical instructions). The software uses the hardware, when the user gives it instructions and changing it in to useful output. 
Many modern computers do billions of calculations each second. They do mathematical arithmetic very quickly but computers do not really "think". They only follow the instructions in their software programs. 
Computer programs are designed or written by computer programmers. A few programmers write programs in the computer's own language called machine code. Machine code has only a few instructions and is based on logic and arithmetic. Using machine code is difficult for most human programmers. 
Today, programs are commonly written using a programming language like C++, Java, and Python. These programming languages are more like the language you talk and write with every day. A program called a compiler translates the user's instructions into binary code (machine code) and turns it into useful information that a user can easily understand, and then the computer will understand the instructions and do what is needed.
History of computers.
Definition.
A computer is an electronic machine which helps in solving problems quickly and easily. It solves problems according to instructions given to it by the computer user. It is a digital machine used in all fields.
Automation.
Humans have a problem with maths. To show this, try doing 584 x 3,220 in your head. It is hard to remember all the steps! People made tools to help them remember where they were in a maths problem. The other problem people have is that they have to do the same problem over and over and over again. A cashier used to make change every day in her head or with a piece of paper. That took a lot of time and people made mistakes. So people made machines that did those same things over and over. This part of computer history is called the "history of automated calculation," which is a fancy phrase for "the history of machines that make it easy for me to do this same maths problem over and over without making mistakes."
The abacus, the slide rule, the astrolabe and the Antikythera mechanism (which dates from about 150-100 BC) are examples of automated calculation machines.
Programming.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : Computer programming
Some people did not want a machine that would do the same thing over and over again. For example, a music box is a machine that plays the same music over and over again. Some people wanted to be able to tell their machine to do different things. For example, they wanted to tell the music box to play different music every time. They wanted to be able to program the music box- to order the music box to play different music. This part of computer history is called the "history of programmable machines" which is a fancy phrase for "The history of machines that I can order to do different things if I know how to speak their language."
One of the first examples of this was built by Hero of Alexandria (c. 10–70 AD). He built a mechanical theater which performed a play lasting 10 minutes and was operated by a complex system of ropes and drums. These ropes and drums were the language of the machine- they told what the machine did and when. Some people argue that this is the first programmable machine.
Most historians agree that the "castle clock", an astronomical clock invented by Al-Jazari in 1206, is the first known programmable analog computer. It showed the zodiac, the solar and lunar orbits, a crescent moon-shaped pointer travelling across a gateway that made some doors to open every hour, and five robotic musicians who play music when levers hit them. The length of day and night could be changed (AKA re-programmed) every day in order to account for the changing lengths of day and night throughout the year. Ada Lovelace is considered to be the first programmer.
The Computing Era.
At the end of the Middle Ages, people in Europe thought math and engineering were more important. In 1623, Wilhelm Schickard made a mechanical calculator. Other Europeans made more calculators after him. They were not modern computers because they could only add, subtract, and multiply- you could not change what they did to make them do something like play Tetris. Because of this, we say they were not programmable. 
In 1801, Joseph Marie Jacquard used punched paper cards to tell his textile loom what kind of pattern to weave. He could use punch cards to tell the loom what to do, and he could change the punch cards, which means he could program the loom to weave the pattern he wanted. This means the loom was programmable. 
Mechanical calculation by machine was done by Charles Babbage. He wanted to make a machine that could do calculations. Charles Babbage's mechanical computer was called it "The Analytical Engine". Because Babbage did not have enough money and always changed his design when he had a better idea, he never built his Analytical Engine.
As time went on, computers got more and more popular. And that stands out at the beginning. This is because people get bored easily doing the same thing over and over. Imagine spending your life writing things down on index cards, storing them, and then having to go find them again. The U.S. Census Bureau in 1890 had hundreds of people doing just that. People got very bored and very frustrated, and would say, "There HAS to be an easier way to do this." Then a clever person worked out how to make machines do a lot of the work. Herman Hollerith figured out how to make a machine that would automatically add up information that the Census bureau collected. The Computing Tabulating Recording Corporation (which later became IBM) made his machines, and everyone was happy. At least, they were happy until their machines broke down, got jammed, and had to be repaired. This is when the Computing Tabulating Recording Corporation invented tech support. 
Because of machines like this, new ways of talking to these machines were invented, and new types of machines were invented, and eventually the computer as we know it was born.
Analog and Digital Computers.
In the first half of the 20th century, scientists started using computers, mostly because scientists had a lot of math to figure out and wanted to spend more of their time thinking about the secrets of the universe instead of spending hours adding numbers together. For example, if they had to launch a rocket ship, they needed to do a lot of math to make sure the rocket did not blow up.
So they put together computers. These computers used analog circuits, which made them very hard to program. Then, in the 1930s, they invented digital computers, which made them easier to program. 
High-scale computers.
Scientists figured out how to make and use digital computers in the 1930s and 1940s. Scientists made a lot of digital computers, and as they did, they figured out how to ask them the right sorts of questions to get the most out of them. Here are a few of the computers they built: 
Several developers of ENIAC saw its problems. They invented a way to for a computer to remember what they had told it, and a way to change what it remembered. This is known as "stored program architecture" or von Neumann architecture. John von Neumann talked about this design in the paper "First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC", distributed in 1945. A number of projects to develop computers based on the stored-program architecture started around this time. The first of these was completed in Great Britain. The first to be demonstrated working was the Manchester Small-Scale Experimental Machine (SSEM or "Baby"), while the EDSAC, completed a year after SSEM, was the first really useful computer that used the stored program design. Shortly afterwards, the machine originally described by von Neumann's paper—EDVAC—was completed but was not ready for two years.
Nearly all modern computers use the stored-program architecture in some form. It has become the main concept which defines a modern computer. Most of the technologies used to build computers have changed since the 1940s, but many current computers still use the von-Neumann architecture.
In the 1950's computers were built out of mostly vacuum tubes. Transistors replaced vacuum tubes in the 1960's because they were smaller and cheaper. They also need less power and do not break down as much as vacuum tubes. In the 1970s, technologies were based on integrated circuits. Microprocessors, such as the Intel 4004 made computers smaller and cheaper. They also made computers faster and more reliable. By the 1980s, computers became small and cheap enough to replace mechanical controls in things like washing machines. The 1980s also saw home computers and personal computer. With the evolution of the Internet, personal computers are becoming as common as the television and the telephone in the household.
In 2005 Nokia started to call some of its mobile phones (the N-series) "multimedia computers" and after the launch of the Apple iPhone in 2007, many are now starting to add the smartphone category among "real" computers. In 2008, if the category of smartphones are included in the numbers of computers in the world, the biggest computer maker by units sold, is no longer Hewlett-Packard, but rather Nokia.
Kinds of computers.
There are six types of computers: personal computers, mainframes, laptop computers, mini computers, super computers and embedded computers. 
A "desktop computer" is a small machine that has a screen (which is not part of the computer). Most people keep them on top of a desk, which is why they are called "desktop computers." "Laptop computers" are computers small enough to fit on your lap. This makes them easy to carry around. Both laptops and desktops are called personal computers, because one person at a time uses them for things like playing music, surfing the web, or playing video games. 
There are bigger computers that many people at a time can use. These are called "Mainframes," and these computers do all the things that make things like the internet work. You can think of a personal computer like this: the personal computer is like your skin: you can see it, other people can see it, and through your skin you feel wind, water, air, and the rest of the world. A mainframe is more like your internal organs: you (hopefully) never see them, and you barely even think about them, but if they suddenly went missing, you would have some very big problems. 
There is another type of computer, called an embedded computer. An embedded computer is a computer that does one thing and one thing only, and usually does it very well. For example, an alarm clock is a embedded computer: it tells the time. Unlike your personal computer, you cannot use your clock to play Tetris. Because of this, we say that embedded computers cannot be programmed, because you cannot install programs like Tetris on your clock. Some mobile phones, automatic teller machines, microwave ovens, CD players and cars are examples of embedded computers.
All-in-one PC.
All-in-one computers are desktop computers that have the CPU and speaker in the same case as the monitor. Apple has made several popular examples of all-in-one computers, such as the original Macintosh of the mid-1980s and the iMac of the late 1990s and 2000s.
Working methods.
Computers store data and the instructions telling them what to do with the data as numbers, because computers can do things with numbers very quickly. These data are stored as binary symbols (1s and 0s). A 1 or a 0 symbol stored by a computer is called a bit, which comes from the words binary digit. Computers can use many bits together to represent instructions and the data that these instructions use. A list of instructions is called a program and is stored on the computer's hard disk. Computers work through the program by using a central processing unit, and they use fast memory called RAM as a space to store the instructions and data while they are doing this. When the computer wants to store the results of the program for later, it uses the hard disk because things stored on a hard disk can still be remembered after the computer is turned off.
An operating system tells the computer how to understand what jobs it has to do, how to do these jobs, and how to tell people the results. It tells the electronics inside the computer, or "hardware", how to work to get the results it needs. This lets most computers have the same operating system, or list of orders to tell it how to talk to the user, while each computer can have its own computer programs or list of jobs to do what its user needs. Having different programs and operating systems makes it easy to learn how to use computers for new things. When a user needs to use a computer for something different, the user can learn how to use a new program. Some operating systems can have simple command lines or a fully user-frendly GUI 
The Internet.
One of the most important jobs that computers do for people is helping with communication. Communication is how people share information. Computers have helped people move forward in science, medicine, business, and learning, because they let experts from anywhere in the world work with each other and share information. They also let other people communicate with each other, do their jobs almost anywhere, learn about almost anything, or share their opinions with each other. The Internet is the thing that lets people communicate between their computers.
Computers and waste.
A computer is now almost always an electronic device. It usually contains materials that will become toxic waste when disposed of. When a new computer is bought in some places, laws require that the cost of its waste management must also be paid for. This is called product stewardship.
Computers can become obsolete quickly, depending on what programs the user runs. Very often, they are thrown away within two or three years, because newer programs require a more powerful computer. This makes the problem worse, so computer recycling happens a lot. Many projects try to send working computers to developing nations so they can be re-used and will not become waste as quickly, as most people do not need to run new programs. Some computer parts, such as hard drives, can break easily. When these parts end up in the landfill, they can put poisonous chemicals like lead into the ground water. Hard drives can also contain secret information like credit card numbers. If the hard drive is not erased before being thrown away, an identity thief can get the information off of the hard drive, even if the drive doesn't work, and use it to steal money from the previous owner's bank account.
Main hardware.
Computers come in different forms, but most of them have a common design.
A computer has several main parts. When comparing a computer to a human body, the CPU is like a brain. It does most of the 'thinking' and tells the rest of the computer how to work. The CPU is on the Motherboard, which is like the skeleton. It provides the basis for where the other parts go, and carries the nerves that connect them to each other and the CPU. The motherboard is connected to a power supply, which provides electricity to the entire computer. The various drives (CD drive, floppy drive, and on many newer computers, USB flash drive) act like eyes, ears, and fingers, and allow the computer to read different types of storage, in the same way that a human can read different types of books. The hard drive is like a human's memory, and keeps track of all the data stored on the computer. Most computers have a sound card or another method of making sound, which is like vocal cords, or a voice box. Connected to the sound card are speakers, which are like a mouth, and are where the sound comes out. Computers might also have a graphics card, which helps the computer to create visual effects, such as 3D environments, or more realistic colors, and more powerful graphics cards can make more realistic or more advanced images, in the same way a well trained artist can.
References.
 (1972) (PDF). . Maynard, MA: Digital Equipment Corporation. http://bitsavers.vt100.net/dec/www.computer.museum.uq.edu.au_mirror/D-09-30_PDP11-40_Processor_Handbook.pdf.
). . TOP500. http://www.top500.org/lists/2006/11/overtime/Architectures. Retrieved 2006-11-27.

</doc>
<doc id="114" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=114" title="Chinese">
Chinese

Chinese might mean:
 
 

</doc>
<doc id="117" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=117" title="Continent">
Continent

A continent is a large area of the land on Earth that is joined together. In general it is agreed there are seven continents: Africa, Antarctica, Asia, Europe, North America, Australasia or Oceania, and South America.
Alternative versions.
Australia.
Some sources say that Australia is one of the seven continents. Others say that Australia is part of Oceania. Oceania is a region which includes Australia, New Zealand and the Pacific Islands. The third alternative is the term Australasia, which includes at least all countries on the Australian continental plate. This includes the islands of New Guinea, Tasmania, New Zealand and a number of smaller islands. It is on the south-eastern side of the Wallace Line, with distinct differences in its biology from the Asian side of the line.
North and South America.
North America and South America are often described as "the Americas". This has the advantage of including Central America and the Caribbean islands. Otherwise, Central America is counted as part of North America.
Eurasia.
Eurasia is not really an alternative, it is a recognition that the landmass of Europe and Asia are continuous, and some of its largest countries are in both continents. Russia extends from eastern Europe to the far east of Asia without a break. The Ural Mountains, which run roughly north/south, are the traditional dividing-line between Europe and Asia. For many purposes it is convenient to consider the great landmass as a single continent, Eurasia.
When British people talk about "the Continent" (or "Continental" things) they mean the European mainland. This meaning is not used as much as it used to be, but is still seen in phrases like "Continental breakfast" (rolls with cheese, jam etc. as distinct from an "English breakfast" which is a cooked breakfast).
Continents not only move but also sometimes move against each other. The Indian subcontinent has been colliding with the Eurasian continent for a while now. As these continents push against each other, they buckle and bend. Because of this, the Himalaya Mountains, where Mount Everest is, are still being made today.

</doc>
<doc id="119" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=119" title="Classical element">
Classical element

The Greek classical elements are fire, air, water, and earth. In Greek philosophy, science and medicine, these make up a whole.
The image below has two squares on top of each other. The corners of one are the classical elements. The corners of the other are the properties.
Galen said these elements were used by Hippocrates to describe the human body. The elements are linked to the four humours: phlegm (water), yellow bile (fire), black bile (earth), and blood (air).
In Chinese Taoism the elements are metal, wood, water, fire, earth (金、木、水、火、土 
 
).

</doc>
<doc id="120" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=120" title="China">
China

China (simplified Chinese: 中国 
 
 
 Pinyin: Zhōngguó) is a cultural region, an ancient civilization, and a nation in East Asia.
The last Chinese Civil War（1927-1949） resulted in two political powers today, even though both governments agree they are one nation:
China has one of the world's oldest civilizations and has the oldest continuous civilization. It has archaeological evidence over 5,000 years old. It also has one of the world's oldest writing systems, and is viewed as the source of many major inventions.
Origins.
The first recorded use of the word "China" is dated 1555. It is derived from "Cin", a Persian name for China popularized in Europe by Marco Polo.
History.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : History of China
Ancient (2100B.C. -1500 A.D.).
Ancient China was one of the first civilizations and was active since the 2nd millennium BC as a feudal society. Chinese civilization was also one of the few to invent writing, the others being Mesopotamia, the Indus Valley civilization, the Maya civilization, the Minoan civilization of ancient Greece, and Ancient Egypt. It reached its golden age during the Tang Dynasty (about A.D. 10th century). Home of Confucianism and Daoism, it had great influence on nearby countries including Japan, Korea and Vietnam in the areas of political system, philosophy, religion, art, and even writing and literature. China is home to some of the oldest artwork in the world. Statues and pottery, as well as decorations made of jade, are some classic examples.
Before Qin Dynasty united China, for hundreds of years there were hundreds of small states that fight each other. Although the continuing wars made people suffer, it was the time when many great philosophies were born, including Confucianism and Daoism. Since Tang Dynasty has been the center of the eastern-asian culture for most time of the history. It had great influence on nearby countries including Japan, Korea and Vietnam in the areas of political system, philosophy, religion, art, and even writing and literature. Confucianism and Daoism alone, have been the foundation of many social values seen in modern eastern-asian culture. 
Its land area has mostly looked like that of modern China, except with northern and western edges that varied. It was often attacked by northern nomadic people such as the Turkics, the Mongols with Genghis Khan and Kublai Khan. During the history of ancient China, the northern nomadic people and the Chinese people had been fighting each other, and taking turns to rule the land and the people of China. However, when the northern people beat the Chinese people and rule the kingdom, they always learned the Chinese way of living and became like Chinese. Many of the strongest dynasties of China were ruled by the northern people, including Qin, Tang, Yuan (Mongolian), and Qing. Each time, they also brought new elements into the Chinese culture. For example, the northern people made the clothes more suitable for activities.
A new age.
While China achieved many things in the First millennium and early 2nd millennium, it became an isolationist country in the 15th century C.E. This was because Spain found enormous silver in the new continent, the main currency(money) in China and Eruope then, and China did not want to be bought by the foreigners. 
By the Renaissance, European powers started to take over other countries in Asia. While China was never actually taken over, many European countries, such as Britain and France built spheres of influence in China. Since China had cut itself off from the world over the previous few centuries, by the Qing Dynasty, it had fallen behind other countries in technology, and was helpless to stop this from happening. This had become clear when it lost the Opium Wars to Britain in the 19th century. 
In 1911, the Republic of China was founded by Sun Yat-sen, but its government was very weak. Warlords controlled many areas. Chiang Kai-shek led wars against them, and became President and dictator.
In 1931, Japan invaded Manchuria, a place in the northeastern part of China. On July 7, 1937, the Japanese attacked the rest of the country, starting what was called the Second Sino-Japanese War. The war later became part of World War II. The war was fought for eight years and millions of Chinese people were killed. In 1945, after the United States dropped atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Japan surrendered.
However, the Chinese Civil War later started between the Kuomintang (Nationalists) of the Republic of China (ROC) and the Communists of the People's Republic of China (PRC). The Communists wanted to make China like the Soviet Union, whereas the other side wanted to keep China in its current state at the time. The Chinese Civil War was going on throughout World War II. The Communists were led by Mao Zedong, Liu Shaoqi and others. Later Liu lost influence with Mao and his death to this day remains unresolved. The Communists eventually won the war. The Nationalists (led by Chiang Kai-shek) fled to the island of Taiwan and set up their new capital city in Taipei. After the Chinese Civil War, the Communist leader Mao Zedong declared a new country, the People's Republic of China (PRC), in Beijing on October 1, 1949.
Under Mao the country stayed poor while Taiwan became richer. His attempt at industrialization with the Great Leap Forward led to the deaths of many people from famine. The Cultural Revolution caused great social upheaval. After 1976, China underwent open market reforms under Deng Xiaoping, and experienced rapid economic growth. China is now one of the largest economies in the world, relying mainly on exports.
In recent history, China has had problems with protests, blocking of information on the Internet, and censorship of news. 1989 was notable for the controversial Tian An Men Massacre.
Culture.
China is the origin of Eastern martial arts, called Kung Fu or its first name Wushu. China is also the home of the well-respected Spa Monastery and Wudang Mountains. Martial art started more for the purpose of survival and warfare than art. Over time some art forms have branched off, while others have retained their distinct Chinese flavor. 
China has had renowned artists including Wong Fei Hung (Huang Fei Hung or Hwang Fei Hung) and many others. Art has also co-existed with a variety of paints including the more standard 18 colors. Legendary and controversial moves like Big Mak are also praised and talked about within the culture.
China has many traditional festivals, such as Spring Festival, Dragon Boat Festival, Mid-autumn Festival and so on. The most significant is Chinese New Year. People in China will have holidays to celebrate these festivals.
Festivals.
Spring Festival is the Chinese New Year. It lasts fifteen days. It starts with the first day of the Chinese lunar year and ends with the full moon fifteen days later. On the first day of the Spring Festival, people call on friends and relatives. Because most of people watch the Spring Festival Celebrations on CCTV all the night on New Year's Eve and don't go to bed until 12:00 AM, they usually get up later in the next day. The fifth day of the Spring Festival is the day to welcome the god of Wealth (Chinese:财神爷), many people make and eat dumplings (Chinese:饺子). They believe that dumplings can hold the god of Wealth and bring luck.The last day of the Spring Festival is the Lantern Festival. On this day, the moon becomes the full moon. People go out and watch the lantern festivals everywhere. After that, they eat sweet dumpling (Chinese:汤圆,元宵), a kind of dumpling which is round and looks like the full moon.
Dragon Boat Festival is celebrated to commemorate the death of Qu Yuan, a patriotic poet of the State of Chu during the Warring States period. He persuaded his emperor not to accept Qin's diplomats' offers several times but his emperor did not listen to him. He was very sad and ended up jumping into the river to end his life. The people loved him so much that they did not want the fish to eat his corpse. They made and threw rice dumplings into the river. They hope the fish eat these dumplings instead of the poet's corpse. They also rowed dragon boats in the river to get rid of the fish. Such practices, eating rice dumplings and holding dragon boat races, become what Chinese do in this festival nowadays.
Held on the fifteenth day of the eighth lunar month, Mid-Autumn Festival is a festival for families. Now when the festival sets in, people would sit together to eat moon cakes, appreciate the bright full moon cakes, appreciate the bright full moon, celebrate the bumper harvest and enjoy the family love and happiness. To the Chinese people, the full moon symbolizes family reunion, as does the "moon cakes." Hence the Mid-Autumn Festival is also called the Family Reunion Festival.

</doc>
<doc id="121" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=121" title="Country">
Country

For other uses, see Country (disambiguation).
In geography and politics, a country is a political division. It is often a sovereign territory. The term is most commonly used for both state and nation, and also with government. For example, Liechtenstein is a country. The United Nations recognises lots of countries. There is around 206 countries in the World with 193 are members of UN.
Other websites.
 "This about a  can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="122" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=122" title="Colchester">
Colchester

Coordinates: 
Colchester is a town in the northern part of the English county of Essex. It has a population of 104,000 people. People believe that Colchester is the oldest Roman town in England.
History.
Before Roman times, Colchester was "Camulodunon". This is a Celtic name that came from Camulos. Camulos was the Celtic god of war. The Romans called Colchester "Camulodunum" (written "CAMVLODVNVM"). Colchester was attacked and burnt by Boudicca in 61 AD.
The church at the Benedictine abbey of Saint John the Baptist was destroyed in 1539. This was when King Henry VIII took the property of the Roman Catholic institutions in England. The only part left is a gate that people still go to visit.
King Cunobelinus (or "Cunobelin") was from Colchester.
Twin cities.
Colchester is twinned with the following cities:
 "This about the  can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="127" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=127" title="Cartography">
Cartography

Cartography is making maps. Cartography is part of geography.
How people make maps is always changing. In the past, maps were drawn by hand, but today most printed maps are made using computers. Someone who makes maps is called a cartographer.
Making a map can be as simple as drawing a direction on a napkin, or as complicated as showing a census of a whole country. Anyone can make a map, but there are people who spend their lives learning how to make complicated maps.
Old fashioned maps were usually carefully drawn onto a piece of paper. The reason they look old is because they have been well used or have been through rough conditions.
Nowadays they are made on a computer because it means they look neater with accurate images.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="129" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=129" title="Creator">
Creator

A Creator is a person who creates something.
In some religions (Judaism, Christianity, Islam) God (or Allah meaning the God in Arabic) is the most important and original Creator of the whole Universe - including Man who is made "in his image" (see Genesis) to observe it and control it like God. The idea that anything that a person is creating, like an idea, can be owned as property comes from the ethical traditions and legal codes that came from these religions.
In other traditions (Buddhism, Native American mythology) anyone has this potential for creating, and can become part of the greater creating of the universe. Stewardship of home, land and all of Earth is a test for participating in this, or just good sense.

</doc>
<doc id="131" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=131" title="Contact network">
Contact network

A contact network is a group of people who can all quickly get in touch with each other. It does not guarantee any kind of help or access to knowledge other than that.
A creative network, social network and power network are also contact networks. These include some kind of guarantee or expectation of help. Thus they involve more investment per person.
 "This can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".</div >

</doc>
<doc id="133" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=133" title="Chorizo">
Chorizo

Chorizo is a pork (pig-meat) sausage which people first made in the Iberian Peninsula. It is made with large pieces of fatty pork, chili pepper and paprika. The special taste of this sausage comes from the mild Spanish paprika in it. 
In the western hemisphere, the Mexican and Caribbean types are better known. These types of chorizo are made with smaller pieces of pork and different seasonings and peppers are used.
Cured smoked chorizo can be eaten without cooking. Fresh chorizo must be cooked before eating. It can be eaten by its self, or as part of meal. It can also be used in place of ground beef or pork.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="134" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=134" title="Creativity">
Creativity

Creativity is the ability of a person or group to make something new and useful or valuable, or the process of making something new and useful or valuable. It happens in all areas of life - science, art, literature and music. As a personal ability it is very difficult to measure. The reason is that we don't understand the mental processes that help some people be more creative than others. Judging what is creative is also controversial. Some people say only things which are historically new are creative, while other people say that if it is new for the creator and the people around them, then it is also creativity.
Some think creativity is an important thing that makes humans different from apes. Others recognize that even apes, other primates, other mammals and some birds adapt to survive by being creative (for example - primates using tools). Liane Gabora believes that all culture comes from creativity, not imitation. Therefore, these people say, human science should focus on it (pay special attention to it): Ethics for example would focus on finding creative solutions to ethical dilemmas. Politics would focus on the political virtues that need some creativity. Imitation would not be the focus of education. Linguistics might be more interested in how new words are created by culture, rather than in how existing ones are used in grammar.
Intellectual interests (recognized as intellectual rights or intellectual property in the law) are a way to reward creativity in law, but they do not always work very well. A good example is copyright which is supposed to pay authors and artists, but may only pay lawyers to make (imitative) arguments in court.
Creativity is a central question in economics, where it is known as ingenuity (the ability to come up with new ideas) or individual capital - capacities that individuals have, that do not arise from simple imitation of what is known already. This is separate from the instructional capital that might try to capture some of that in a patent or training system that helps others do what the individual leader or founder of the system can do. In urban economics there are various ways to measure creativity - the Bohemian Index and Gay Index are two attempts to do this accurately and predict the economic growth of cities based on creativity. For information on creativity see 

</doc>
<doc id="135" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=135" title="Catharism">
Catharism

Template codice_1 has been incorrectly substituted.
The Cathar faith was a version of Christianity. They were usually considered Gnostics. The word 'Cathar' comes the Greek word "katharos" meaning 'unpolluted' (from Tobias Churton, "The Gnostics") or "the pure ones".
Principles.
The Cathars believed that the world had been made by a bad god. They believed that this bad god had taken them from the good god and put them in the world, but inside their bodies there was a spirit, and that spirit needed to return to the good god. They were famous for a belief in a form of reincarnation and believed that when someone died the bad god would put that person's spirit in a new body. They believed this cycle of coming back to life could be escaped by a ritual cleansing. They were opposed to the doctrine of sin. 
Women were prominent in the faith. They were pacifists. They didn't eat anything that was made from other animals, including meat and cows milk. The only exception to this was fish. Fish was OK to eat because they believed fishes were not alive but just things that were sometimes produced from dirt and water.
They preached tolerance of other faiths. They rejected the usual Christian rules of marriage and only believed in the New Testament. An earlier 10th century Bulgarian heresy, Bogomilism and also Manichaeism started some of these trends. 
Language.
They used a bible in the language people spoke. Many other Christians used a Bible in Latin. Latin was spoken only by the priests.
Problems.
In 1145, open challenge to Catholic dominance began. In about 1165, the first Cathars said that the Church was "full of ravening (starving) wolves and hypocrites" and "worshipping the wrong God", right in front of the most powerful Catholics. In 1166, the Council of Oxford in England wiped out the English Cathars. It was also suppressed in Northern France. In 1167, Cathar bishops met to discuss organizing a counter Church - in the South of France, the Languedoc nobles protected it, and many noble women became "Perfects". Parish clergy had low morale, or confidence.
Reactions.
The Catholic Church was against Catharism, seeing it as a heresy.
In the South of France there was tremendous religious fervor, and an economy that was starting to grow, and a social class of merchants and peasants was starting to grow. Peasants owned their own land. Meanwhile, in other parts of Europe, peasants were forced to give up their land to nobles and become serfs or slaves - the system of feudalism. There was a strong central absolute monarchy that did not exist in the South of France. The burghers and bankers had more power in this looser system. R. I. Moore is a historian who believes that it was desire to crush this system and take over the land that drove the attack.
However, there was real cultural and religious difference to cause problems: Troubadors, who combined some of the traditions of the Bards of the Celts, and Jews, were both part of the multicultural society in the South of France. Their influences were not appreciated by local or Roman Church figures. The 12th century Roman Catholic Monks were founding their monasteries outside the towns, drawing the best people there.
Results.
The Cathars thus had little competition. The Cathar "Perfects", the so-called Good Men or Good Women, lived restrained lives and spread their faith in towns - where the Catholics in general did not have their best agents. Also, Cathars preached that only these Good leaders had to follow the regimens their whole lives - lay people could repent only on their deathbeds. Many 20th century Christian sects have similar beliefs.
The Albigensian Crusade.
Methods.
The Pope ordered a crusade against the Cathars in southern France. He said any crusader who answered the call would be given the same rewards as a crusader who went to the Holy Land. This was an absolution of all sin.
In the Launguedoc, on the 22nd of July 1209, a force of about 30,000 Crusaders arrived at the walls of Beziers bearing the cross pattee to mislead and create ease among the Cathars, thinking they were friend, not foe, and demanded that about 200 Cathars be surrendered. The people of the town who were mostly Catholic, said that rather than turn over their friends and family, "we would rather be flayed alive." 
A mistake by the defenders of Beziers let thousands of attackers in. Arnauld Amaury made the famous quote "Kill them all, god knows his own" on being asked how to tell who were Cathars during the assault. Everyone in the town was killed, some while taking refuge in the church. It is guessed that 20,000 were killed, many of whom were Catholics and not Cathars at all. The crusade became known as the Albigensian crusade after the town of Albi. It was to wipe out the Cathars almost entirely over forty or so years. The Crusaders wanted to go home, but were ordered by the Pope to continue until the whole South of France was controlled and all Cathars were dead. In 1210, they attacked the fortress at Minerv and built "the first great bonfire of heretics" - beginning the practice of burning at the stake that would continue in the Inquisition of the Counter-Reformation. It is interesting to note that at the siege of Montsegur when the fires were lit the Cathars ran down the hill and threw themselves on, as their beliefs were very strong.
Result.
Catharism disappeared from the northern Italian cities after the 1260s, pressured by the Inquisition. The last known Cathar perfectus in the Languedoc, Guillaume Bélibaste, was killed in 1321.

</doc>
<doc id="136" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=136" title="Cosmology">
Cosmology

Cosmology is the branch of astronomy that deals with the origin, structure, evolution and space-time relationships of the universe. NASA defines cosmology as "The study of the structure and changes in the present universe". Another definition of cosmology is "the study of the universe, and humanity's place in it".
Modern cosmology is dominated by the Big Bang theory, which brings together observational astronomy and particle physics. 
Though the word "cosmology" is recent (first used in 1730 in Christian Wolff's "Cosmologia Generalis"), the study of the universe has a long history.
History.
Until recently, people thought that the universe was the Milky Way. They thought this because they could only see the planets up to Saturn and stars. With the invention of the telescope, our universe got bigger. Even in the 20th century, people thought that the Milky Way was the universe. With the Hubble Space Telescope, people could see things far away.
References.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="142" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=142" title="Church">
Church

This page is about the church as a building. For the Church as a Christian organization, see One Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church. For other uses of the word "church", see Church (disambiguation).
A church is a building that was constructed to allow people to meet to worship together. These people are usually Christians, or influenced by Christianity. Some other religious groups also call their religious buildings churches.
Depending on the number of people that are in a community, the churches come in different sizes. Small churches are called chapels. The churches in a particular geographical area form a group called the diocese. Each diocese has a cathedral. In most cases, the cathedral is a very big church. Cathedrals are the seat of bishops.
History of church buildings.
 
In the early days of Christianity people had to worship in secret. Christian worship was not allowed in the Roman empire, so Christians had to meet in a secret place. Sometimes they met in people’s houses or barns, sometimes they met underground. The first places that were built for Christian worship were small chapels that were cut into a rock where people could worship without being discovered.
After the death of the Roman emperor Constantine in 337 A.D. Christians were allowed to have buildings to worship in. These first churches were built on a similar plan to Roman basilicas. This plan was later used for the fine Gothic cathedrals and churches that were built at the end of the Middle Ages.
The parts of a church.
For more details, see List of church architecture terms
There are several parts in the architecture of a church. Not all churches will have all these parts:
In Roman Catholic churches there is always a stoup (bowl) of holy water near the entrance of the church. This tradition comes from the fact that Roman basilicas had a fountain for washing in front of the entrance. The font is a bowl where people (often babies) are baptized. This is also near the entrance of the church. This is a symbol of the fact that it is welcoming the people into the Christian church.
Traditionally the nave has long benches for the congregation to sit on. These are called pews. Some churches may now have replaced their pews with chairs so that they can be moved about for different occasions. At the front of the nave is the pulpit where the priest preaches (these talks are called “sermons”). There is also a lectern (like a large music stand) from where the lessons (the Bible readings) are read.
If there are aisles along the side of the nave there will be pillars which hold up the roof. In large churches or cathedrals there may be a row of little arches along the top of these pillars. This is called the triforium. Over the triforium is the clerestory which is a row of small windows high up in the church wall.
The chancel is the most holy part of the church, and this is why it is often separated from the nave by a screen which can be made of wood or stone, or occasionally iron. The congregation can see through the screen. On the top of the screen there may be a cross. This is called a rood (pronounce like “rude”) screen. Priests used to climb up a staircase to the top of the rood screen to read the epistle and the gospel. Sometimes people sang from there.
Inside the chancel are the benches where the choir sit. These are called choir stalls. They are on both sides. The two sides of the choir sit facing one another. The choir members who sit on the left (north side) are called “cantoris” (the side where the “cantor” sits) and those on the right (south side) are called “decani” (the side where the deacon sits). In some large churches or cathedrals the seats for the priests tip up. The top of these seats, when they are tipped up, are called misericords (from the Latin word for “mercy”). This is because the priests or monks were able to lean against them when they got tired if they had to stand up for a long time.
Sometimes there are holes in the walls of the screen so that the congregation can see through. These are called squints. If there is a recess in the wall it is called an aumbry. It is a cupboard for communion wine that has been blessed by a priest.
The altar may be right at the east end of the church, but in larger churches or cathedrals it is often much farther forward. In that case the very east end is called an apse. Sometimes it is a separate chapel called the “Lady Chapel”.
Churches through the ages.
The design of churches changed a lot during the course of history. Often churches were made bigger. When this happened there may be a mixture of architectural styles. These styles vary a lot in different countries.
English churches.
In English churches there were several different periods of architecture:
In the 1600s, churches were built in a variety of styles. Often they copied some of the older styles. After the Great Fire of London many new churches were built by the architect Sir Christopher Wren. They were built in the classical style. Churches continued to be built in later centuries like this, but also the Gothic style continued to be used.
Modern churches often do not have the traditional cross-shape. It is difficult for the congregation to see and hear what is happening in the chancel. Modern churches bring the congregation, choir and priests in closer touch. An example is the round design for the Church of Christ the Cornerstone in Milton Keynes. Modern churches are often simpler but with a warmer character than the Gothic churches. Many have beautiful mosaic glass windows. Coventry Cathedral is a famous example of a modern church building.

</doc>
<doc id="144" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=144" title="City">
City

Definition.
There is no rule that is used all over the world to decide why some places are called "city" and other places are called "town". 
Some things that make a city are: 
In American English, people often call all places cities. (See below: Size of cities)
Size of cities.
The sizes of cities can be very different. This depends on the type of city that it is. Cities that were built hundreds of years ago and which have not changed much, are very much smaller than modern cities. There are two main reasons. One reason is that old cities often have a city wall, and most of the city is inside it. Another important reason is that the streets in old cities are often narrow. If the city got too big, it was hard for a cart carrying food to get to the market place. People in cities need food, and the food always has to come from outside the city. Cities that were on a river like London could grow much bigger than cities that were on a mountain like Sienna in Italy, because the river made a transport route for carrying food and other goods, as well as for transporting people. London has been changing continually for hundreds of years, while Siena, which was a very important city in the 1300s has changed very little in 700 years. Modern cities with modern transport systems can grow very large, because the streets are wide enough for cars, buses and trucks, and there are often railway lines as well.
In the US, the word city is often used for towns that are not very big. When the first European people went to America, they gave the name "city" to new places. They hoped the places would be great cities in the future. For example, Salt Lake City was the name given to a village of 148 people. When they started building the town they made street plans and called it Great Salt Lake City (for the nearby Great Salt Lake). Now, 150 years later, it really is a big city. 
In modern times many cities have grown bigger and bigger. The whole area is often called a "metropolis" and can sometimes includes several small ancient towns and villages. The "metropolis" of London includes the City of London, the City of Westminster and many old villages such as Notting Hill, Southwark, Richmond, Greenwich and etc. The part that is officially known as the "City of London" only takes up one square mile. The rest is known as "Greater London". Many other cities have grown in the same way. 
These giant cities can be exciting places to live, and many people can find good jobs there, but modern cities also have many problems. Many people cannot find jobs in the cities and have to get money by begging or by crime. Cars, factories, and waste create a lot of pollution that makes people sick.
Urban history.
Urban History is history of civilization. The first cities were made in ancient times, as soon as people began to create civilization. Famous ancient cities which fell to ruins included Babylon, Troy, Mycenae and Mohenjo Daro.
Benares in northern India is one among the ancient cities which has a history of more 3000 years. Other cities that have existed since ancient times are Athens in Greece, Rome and Volterra in Italy, Alexandria in Egypt and York in England.
In Europe, in the Middle Ages, being a city was a special privilege, granted by nobility. Cities that fall into this category, usually had (or still have) city walls. The people who lived in the city were privileged over those who did not. Medieval cities that still have walls include Carcassonne in France, Tehran in Iran, Toledo in Spain and Canterbury in England. 
In the United Kingdom, a city is a town which people have always called a city, or which has got the name "city" status by royal charter (a special paper from the king or queen). Cities usually get this because they have a special number of people or are important. In the past, cities got that name if they had a cathedral or a university. Some cathedral cities, for example St David's, are small, and people do not normally think of them as cities. Cities that became cities because of their university generally grow because more people move there to be educated at the university colleges. The university cities of Oxford and Cambridge are famous throughout the world. The largest city is Shanghai, while the fastest growing is Dubai.
World's largest cities.
These cities have more than 10 million people:

</doc>
<doc id="146" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=146" title="Cooking">
Cooking

Cooking is a process to make food ready to eat by heating it. People can cook food with fire using wood or charcoal, with a stove that uses propane or natural gas, or with a stove that uses electricity. An oven is a part of a stove that is like a box. People also build ovens out of clay or bricks.
There are several different ways to cook food. We boil food by cooking it in water. We fry food by cooking it in hot butter, fat or oil. We bake food by keeping it hot in an oven. 
We roast or grill food by holding it over a hot fire.
People often cook meat by boiling, roasting or grilling it. People bake bread. Some breads are fried.
Usually we cook the food in some kind of pot or pan. Sometimes people cook food by putting it directly into the fire, by wrapping the food in leaves before they put it into the fire, or holding it over a fire with a stick.
Before foods are cooked, we say they are raw. Some foods are good to eat raw. Other foods are not good for the body when they are raw, so they must be cooked. Some foods are good to eat either raw or cooked and can be used in different recipes.
Cooks.
A person whose job it is to cook food may be called a cook or a chef. However, the word cooker means a machine or tool that a cook might use to cook food, such as a "rice cooker."
To many people, cooking is an art. To many other people, it is a job.
Cooking as an art is preparing the food so it tastes and looks really good.
There is a large economy for cooking in the world. Restaurants hire skilled cooks for amounts of money and customers pay for meals.

</doc>
<doc id="148" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=148" title="Chat">
Chat

To chat is to talk about ordinary things that are not very important. A person can chat with another person, or to many people. People also use this word now for parts of the Internet where we can talk with many different people at the same time. Usually, people chat on the Internet in a chat room or messaging service like AOL Instant Messenger (AIM), Yahoo Messenger Windows Live Messenger or Tencent QQ. There are also programs which let people use different messaging services from one program, such as Pidgin.
Related pages.
 "This can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".</div >

</doc>
<doc id="149" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=149" title="Cup">
Cup

A cup is any kind of container used for holding liquid and drinking. These include:
Cup may also mean:
 
 

</doc>
<doc id="151" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=151" title="Crime">
Crime

A crime (or misdemeanor or felony) is an act done by a person which is against the laws of a country or region. A person who does this is called a criminal.
The basic idea of what things are called "crimes" is that they are thought to be things that might cause a problem for another person. Things like killing another person, injuring another person, or stealing from another person are crimes in most countries. Also, it can be a crime to eat some types of food, such as meat of rare exotic animals, marijuana leaves, or mushrooms that contain psychedelic drugs.
When some criminals make money from crime, they try to stop the police finding out where the money came from by money laundering.
Levels of crime.
There are various levels of crimes. In some jurisdictions the are:
Different countries have different ideas of what things are crimes, and which ones are the worst. Some things that are crimes in one country are not crimes in other countries. Many countries get their ideas of what things are crimes from religions or controversial events which cause a law to be quickly created. For example, a religion might consider eating a particular food to be a crime. When automobiles became numerous, they killed or hurt many people in road accidents, so new laws were made for them.
In many countries, if people say they made or wrote a book, movie, song, or Web page that they did not really make or write, it is a crime against copyright laws. In many countries, helping to grow, make, move, or sell illegal drugs is a crime. 
In most countries, police try to stop crimes and to find criminals. When the police find someone who they think might be a criminal, they usually hold the person in a jail. Then, usually, a court or a judge decides if the person really did a crime. If the court or judge decides that the person really did it, then he or she might have to pay a fine or go to prison. Sometimes the judge might decide that the criminal should be executed (killed). This is called Capital punishment (or the "Death Penalty"). There are countries in the world who execute criminals, and others who do not.
 "This can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".</div >

</doc>
<doc id="153" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=153" title="Time Cube">
Time Cube

Time Cube is a website created by Gene Ray. On that website, Dr. Ray explains his "Time Cube" theory, which describes the planet Earth as having a cubic symmetry, and time as rotating four "corners". He also says that all of modern physics is wrong. Scientists reject these ideas, saying that they make no sense and cannot be tested.
The Time Cube website is written in an angry and hateful voice. On his site, Ray says that anyone who does not believe in Time Cube is "stupid and evil". Some of the comments are racist, especially against black people and Jews. There are also many comments against gay people. Many people find the site to be difficult to understand. 
Ray has spoken about Time Cube at two universities in the United States, MIT and Georgia Tech. At MIT, a professor tried to cancel the lecture before it took place. Ray believes this is proof of a conspiracy to keep information about Time Cube hidden.
Other websites.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="156" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=156" title="Census of Marine Life">
Census of Marine Life

The Census of Marine Life is a ten year survey of life in the oceans, starting in 2000. Its head is Ron O'Dor of Dalhousie University in Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada. It uses data from researchers all over the world. More than 70 nations are involved and over a billion US dollars will be spent on it. 
It is a major work of marine ecology.
It is trying to do what the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) and National Geographic Society did for terrestrial ecoregions - say exactly what is alive on the planet.
In this case, in the seas.

</doc>
<doc id="158" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=158" title="Maize">
Maize

Maize (called corn in some countries) is a member of the grass family "Poaceae". It is a cereal grain that was first grown by people in ancient Central America. It is now the third most important cereal crop in the world. 
Maize is a leafy stalk whose kernels have seeds inside. It is an angiosperm, which means that its seeds are enclosed inside a fruit or shell. It is used as a food staple by many people in Mexico, Central and South America and parts of Africa. In Europe and the rest of North America, maize is grown mostly for use as animal feed. In Canada and the United States, maize is commonly referred to as "corn". In recent years corn has become an important part in a majority of American foods through the use of corn starch. 
Maize has been a fruitful model organism for research in genetics for many years: see Barbara McClintock. Research has shown that artificial selection developed maize from a Mexican plant called 
Teosinte.
References.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="159" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=159" title="Civics">
Civics

Civics is the study of government. It most often refers to studying government in high school to prepare to be a good citizen. In college, civics is usually called political science. Since a city has the most unsimple government problems, the word for this study is like that for city.
Theories of civics can be grouped as:
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="161" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=161" title="Calculus">
Calculus

Template codice_1 has been incorrectly substituted.
Calculus is a branch of mathematics which helps us understand changes between values that are related by a function. For example, if you had one formula telling how much money you got every day, calculus would help you understand related formulas like how much money you have in total, and whether you are getting more money or less than you used to. All these formulas are functions of time, and so that is one way to think of calculus -- studying functions of time. There are two different types of calculus. Differential calculus divides things into small ("different") pieces and tells us how they change from one moment to the next, while integral calculus joins ("integrates") the small pieces together and tells us how much of something is made, overall, by a series of changes. Calculus is used in many different areas of study such as physics, astronomy, biology, engineering, economics, medicine and sociology.
History.
In the 1670s and 1680s, Sir Isaac Newton in England and Gottfried Leibniz in Germany figured out calculus at the same time, working separately from each other. Newton wanted to have a new way to predict where to see planets in the sky, because astronomy had always been a popular and useful form of science, and knowing more about the motions of the objects in the night sky was important for navigation of ships. Leibniz wanted to measure the space (area) under a curve (a line which is not straight). Many years later, the two men argued over who discovered it first. Scientists from England supported Newton, but scientists from the rest of Europe supported Leibniz. Most mathematicians today agree that both men share the credit equally. Some parts of modern calculus come from Newton, such as its uses in physics. Other parts come from Leibniz, such as the symbols used to write it.
They were not the first people to use mathematics to describe the physical world—Aristotle and Pythagoras came earlier, and so did Galileo, who said that mathematics was the language of science. But they were the first to design a system that describes how things change over time and can predict how they will change in the future.
The name "calculus" was the Latin word for a small stone the ancient Romans used in counting and gambling. The English word "calculate" comes from the same Latin word.
Differential calculus.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : Differential calculus 
Differential calculus is the process of finding out the rate of change of a variable compared to another variable. It can be used to find the speed of a moving object or the slope of a curve, figure out the maximum or minimum points of a curve, or find answers to problems in the electricity and magnetism areas of physics, among many other uses.
Many amounts can be variables, which can change their value unlike numbers such as 5 or 200. Some examples of variables are distance and time. The speed of an object is how far it travels in a particular time. So if a town is 80 kilometres (50 miles) away and a person in a car gets there in one hour, they have traveled at an average speed of 80 kilometres (50 miles) per hour. But this is only an average—they may have been traveling faster at some times (on a highway) and slower at others (at a traffic light or on a small street where people live). Imagine a driver trying to figure out a car's speed using only its odometer (distance meter) and clock, without a speedometer!
Until calculus was invented, the only way to work this out was to cut the time into smaller and smaller pieces, so the average speed over the smaller time would get closer and closer to the actual speed at a point in time. This was a very long and hard process and had to be done each time people wanted to work something out.
A very similar problem is to find the slope (how steep it is) at any point on a curve. The slope of a "straight" line is easy to work out—it is simply how much it goes up ("y" or vertical) divided by how much it goes across ("x" or horizontal). On a "curve", though, the slope is a variable (has different values at different points) because the line bends. But if the curve was to be cut into very, very small pieces, the curve at the point would look almost like a very short straight line. So to work out its slope, a straight line can be drawn through the point with the same slope as the curve at that point. If it is done exactly right, the straight line will have the same slope as the curve, and is called a tangent. But there is no way to know (without very complicated mathematics) whether the tangent is exactly right, and our eyes are not accurate enough to be certain whether it is exact or simply very close.
What Newton and Leibniz found was a way to work out the slope (or the speed in the distance example) exactly using simple and logical rules. They divided the curve into an infinite number of very small pieces. They then chose points on either side of the range they were interested in and worked out tangents at each. As the points moved closer together towards the point they were interested in, the slope "approached" a particular value as the tangents approached the real slope of the curve. They said that this particular value it approached was the actual slope.
Let's say we have a function "y" = f("x"). f is short for function, so this equation means "y is a function of x". This tells us that how high y is on the vertical axis depends on what x (the horizontal axis) is at that time. For example with the equation "y" = "x"², we know that if "x" is 1, then "y" will be 1; if "x" is 3, then "y" will be 9; if "x" is 20, then "y" will be 400.
formula_1
If we use y = x², the derivative produced using this method is 2"x", or 2 multiplied by "x". So we know without having to draw any tangent lines that at any point on the curve "f(x)" = "x"², the derivative "f'(x)" (marked with an apostrophe) will be 2"x" at any point. This process of working out a slope using limits is called differentiation, or finding the derivative.
Leibniz came to the same result, but called h "dx", which means "with respect to x". He called the resulting change in f(x) "dy", which means "a tiny amount of y". Leibniz's notation is used by more books because it is easy to understand when the equations become more complicated. In Leibniz notation:
formula_2
Mathematicians have grown this basic theory to make simple algebra rules which can be used to find the derivative of almost any function.
Main idea of calculus.
The main idea in calculus is called the "Fundamental Theorem of Calculus". This main idea says that the two calculus processes, differential and integral calculus, are opposites. That is, a person can use differential calculus to undo an integral calculus process. Also, a person can use integral calculus to undo a differential calculus method. This is just like using division to "undo" multiplication, or addition to "undo" subtraction.
In a single sentence, the Fundamental Theorem runs something like this: "The derivative of the integral of a function "f" is the function itself".
Demonstration of main idea of calculus.
How to use integral calculus to find areas.
The method integral calculus uses to find areas of shapes is to break the shape up into many small boxes, and add up the area of each of the boxes. This gives an approximation to the area. If the boxes are made narrower and narrower, then there are more and more of them, and the area of all the boxes becomes very close to the area of the shape. One of the main ideas of calculus is that we can imagine having an infinite number of these boxes, each infinitely narrow, and then we would have the exact area of the shape.
Other uses of calculus.
Calculus is used to describe things that change, like things in nature. It can be used for showing and learning all of these:

</doc>
<doc id="162" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=162" title="Coin">
Coin

A coin is normally a round piece of metal that is used as currency, or money. Coins have been made for about 2600 years; the first place to make coins was Lydia (modern Turkey).
Appearance.
Many coins have unique or complicated decorations; one side often has the picture of a famous or important person's head on it. Most people use coins as currency. 
Uses.
The different decorations on each side of a coin might be used to decide things randomly. This is called "tossing a coin". A person can throw the coin into the air and catch it. You then look at which side is facing up. If the head is facing up it is called "heads", if the other side is facing up it is called "tails". Before tossing the coin someone has to decide what each side means. Tossing a coin can be a type of gambling, which is illegal (against the law) in some countries. 
Coins aren't as efficient as money bills, but are still used.
Other views.
Some people see coins as a sign of greed, such as some Communists and Puritans, who sometimes condemn over-hoarding of coins, and ascetics, who often keep little in the ways of money (coins), leading a "poor"-lifestyle.
Collecting.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : Coin collecting
Because coins have been made for a very long time, some people collect old coins. They can be much cheaper than other old things, especially if they are made of cheap metals like copper. Older coins normally cost more than newer ones, but rarity matters more-some coins from the 1920s cost vast sums, while some Roman coins cost very little.

</doc>
<doc id="164" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=164" title="Conceptual metaphor">
Conceptual metaphor

A conceptual metaphor or cognitive metaphor is a metaphor which refers to one domain (group of ideas) in terms of another. For example, treating quantity in terms of direction:
The idea of a conceptual metaphor came from a book by George Lakoff and Mark Johnson in 1980: "Metaphors we live by".
A convention is to write conceptual metaphors in small capital letters, e.g. time is money, with the target domain (idea being referred to) first, here "money," and the source domain (terms used to refer to it) second.
Political metaphors.
There are many more, enough to prove the importance of the metaphor in our lives.

</doc>
<doc id="166" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=166" title="Crust">
Crust

The crust of a piece of bread is the edge where it is harder and darker.
Crust can also mean:
 
 

</doc>
<doc id="167" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=167" title="Comedy">
Comedy

Comedy (from Greek: Kωμωδία) may be used in different ways:
Comedies may also show people telling jokes and funny stories. People who are known for acting in comedies are comedians or comedic actors.
History.
Satire.
The ancient Greeks had comedies, which were presented in competitions at the festival of Dionysia. 
One of the best-known comedy authors of the time was Aristophanes (about 446–386 BC). One of his works, "The Clouds" was performed 425 BC. The work did not survive completely, but a later version did survive. It is a satire against Socrates, and pictures the great philosopher as a swaggering con artist. Some of the accusations were re-used at Socrates' trial, twenty years later. 
Typical for satire are that the author criticizes society, and living people. 
Satyr plays.
Another type of Ancient Greek theatre was the satyr play. This was mock drunkenness, brazen sexuality (including phallic props), pranks, sight gags, and general merriment. The modern equivalent would be knock-about comedy.
Humour.
Humour, or 'New Comedy' is not about criticizing people or ideas, but rather about showing characters in funny situations. The most important Greek playwright of this type was probably Menander. The best known Roman comedy writer was Plautus. He often used Greek comedies for his plays.
Many comedy plays were written in the 1500s by the British writer William Shakespeare.
Shakespeare's comedy plays include:" All’s Well That Ends Well, The Comedy of Errors, A Midsummer Nights Dream", and "Twelfth Night". In Shakespeare's day a comedy did not mean a play that would make people laugh or that had a lot of jokes. Instead it was a play in which all the problems work out all right in the end. This was unlike a tragedy, where the problems do not work out, usually resulting in someone's death.
The two masks, one was smiling, the other crying, often associated with theatre represent comedy and tragedy.
Types.
Slapstick.
There are different types of comedy. One type of comedy is called "slap stick comedy." In "slap stick comedy," people do silly things such as tripping, falling over or embarrassing themselves just to make people laugh. Slap stick comedy can be used in comedy movies or comedy television shows.
Slap stick comedy was used a lot in silent (no sound) movies from the 1920s. A comedian who acted in the silent movies who used a lot of slapstick comedy was Charlie Chaplin. In the 1950s and 1960s, comedian Jerry Lewis also used silly slap stick comedy in his comedy movies.
Comedy movies.
A comedy is a very popular type of movie. Some comedy movies have "slapstick comedy," in which people just do silly things such as tripping, falling over or embarrassing themselves just to make people laugh. Other comedy movies show funny stories or situations in which people are behaving in a silly manner. Some comedies make the audience laugh by showing strange or unusual images or situations that do not make sense.
Parody/spoof.
A parody or spoof movie makes another movie, series or person look silly to make people laugh.
Imitating and exaggerating one movie in a funny manner to make people laugh 
Different types of comedy movies.
Some types of comedy movies mix comedy with other types of movies. 
Comedy television shows.
Comedy shows are very popular on television. Comedy shows on television are often called "sitcoms." The word "sitcom" is a shortened way of saying "situational comedy." Television situational comedies usually show characters who do silly or funny things which make the audience laugh.

</doc>
<doc id="168" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=168" title="Comet">
Comet

This article is about the objects in space. For store, see Comet (shop).
A comet is a ball of mostly ice that moves around in outer space. Comets are often described as "dirty snowballs". They are very different from asteroids. The orbital inclinations of comets are usually high and not near the ecliptic where most solar system objects are found. Most of them are long-period comets and go further than Pluto. Those are very far away from the Sun, but some comets come near enough to Earth for us to see at night. 
They have long "tails", because the Sun melts the ice. A comet's tail does not trail behind it, but points directly away from the Sun, because it is blown by the solar wind.
The hard centre of the comet is the "nucleus". It is one of the blackest things in the solar system. When light shone on the nucleus of Halley's Comet, the comet reflected only 4% of the light back to us.
"Periodic" comets visit again and again. "Non-periodic" or "single-apparition" comets visit only once.
Comets sometimes break up, as Comet Biela did in the 19th century. Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 broke up, and the pieces hit Jupiter in 1994. Some comets orbit (go around) together in groups. Astronomers think these comets are broken pieces that used to be one object.
Famous comets.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : list of comets
History of comets.
In old times, people used to be scared of comets. They did not know what they were, or where they came from. Some thought that they were fireballs sent from demons or gods to destroy the earth. They said that each time a comet appeared, it would bring bad luck with it. Whenever a comet appeared, a king would die. For example, the Bayeux Tapestry shows the return of Halley's Comet and the death of a king. Comets were also known to end wars and thought to bring famine. During the Renaissance, astronomers started to look at comets with less superstition and to base their science on observations. Tycho Brahe reasoned that comets did not come from the earth, and his calculations showed that comets must be six times farther than the earth is from the moon.
Edmond Halley reasoned that some comets are periodic, that is, they appear again after a certain number of years, and again and again. This led to the first prediction of a comet's return, Halley's Comet, named after him.
Isaac Newton also studied comets. He realised that comets make U-turns around the sun. He asked his friend Edmond Halley to publish this in his book "Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica". Before Newton said this, people believed that comets go in to the sun, then another comes out from behind the sun. 
In later years some astronomers thought comets were spit out by planets, especially Jupiter.
All this new information and research gave people confidence, but some still thought that comets were messengers from the gods. One 18th century vision said that comets were the places that hell was, where souls would ride, being burned up by the heat of the sun and frozen by the cold of space.
In modern times space probes have visited comets to learn more about them.

</doc>
<doc id="169" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=169" title="Cytology">
Cytology

Cytology is the study of the cells, especially their appearance and structure. Cells are the small parts that make up all living things, and their effects on each other and their environment.
There are two types of cells. Prokaryotic cells do not have a clear and easy-to-see nucleus, and do not have a membrane, or wall, around them. Eukaryotic cells have an easy-to-see nucleus where all of the cell's functions take place, and a membrane around them. The main organelles of a cell and their uses are: 
Other pages.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="170" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=170" title="Christian">
Christian

For other uses, see Christian (disambiguation).
A Christian    is a person who believes in Christianity, a monotheistic religion. Christianity is mostly about the life and teachings of Jesus Christ, in the New Testament and interpreted of prophesied in the Hebrew Bible/Old Testament. Christianity is the world's largest religion, with 2.1 billion followers around the world. The Quran states that true Christians should love Muslims; "And thou wilt find the nearest of them in affection to those who believe (to be) those who say: Lo! We are Christians."
Christians consider the Holy Bible to be a sacred book, inspired by God. The Holy Bible is a combination of the Hebrew Bible, or Torah, and a collection of writings called the New Testament. Views on the importance of these writings vary. Some Christian groups prefer to favor the New Testament, while others believe the entire Bible is equally important. Also, while many Christians prefer to consider the Bible as true, inspired by God, not all groups believe that it is completely accurate. Some of these groups may think that the Bible is a collection of stories meant to show who God is, or even just the opinions of humans that reveal some commonly-believed truth.
The issue of "who is a Christian?" can be very controversial. Christians often disagree over this issue due to their differences in opinion on spiritual matters. It is not possible to provide a statement that all readers may agree with, therefore, a definition will not be provided. Even very traditional doctrines such as the belief that Jesus Christ is God, or that God consists of the Father, Son, and Spirit, are not common to people who claim Christianity as their religion. 
Many Christians choose to go to church. Most Christians believe this to be a sign of their religious devotion to God and an act of worship. However, some Christian groups think that one can be a Christian without ever going to a church. Though there are many different viewpoints on the issue, most Protestants believe all Christians are part of the spiritual church of Christ, whether or not those Christians go to an actual church each week. On the other hand, Catholics believe that the Holy Catholic Church is the only true church.
In some Christian movements (especially Fundamentalism and Evangelicalism), to be a born-again Christian is to undergo a "spiritual rebirth" 

</doc>
<doc id="171" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=171" title="Cheese">
Cheese

Template codice_1 has been incorrectly substituted.
Cheese is milk made into a solid form that you eat. There are many types of cheese. Many things affect the style, texture and flavor of a cheese. These include the milk (cow or goat), if the milk has been pasteurized, the amount of butterfat, bacteria and mold in the cheese, how the cheese is made and how old the cheese is.
The origin of cheese.
People have been making cheese since before history was written down. It is not known when cheese was first made. It is known that cheese was eaten by the Sumerians in about 4000 BC.
How cheese is made.
Cheese is made using milk. The milk of cows, goats, and sheep are most popular. Buffalo, camel and even mare's milk can also be used. Cheese makers usually cook the milk in large pots. They add salt and a substance from the stomach of young cows called rennet. This curdles the cheese and makes it solid. Some makers do not add rennet. They curdle the cheese in other ways. Cheese made in factories is often curdled by using bacteria. Other ingredients are added and the cheese is usually aged for a short time.
Types of cheese.
There are many different ways to classify cheeses. Some ways include:
There are also man-made foods that some people use instead of cheese. These are called Cheese analogues.
Different types of cheese include:

</doc>
<doc id="173" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=173" title="Constitution">
Constitution

This article is about constitutions in general. For the US Constitution, see United States Constitution.
The constitution of a country (or a state) is a special type of law document that tells how its government is supposed to work. It tells how the country's leaders are to be chosen and how long they get to stay in office, how new laws are made and old laws are to be changed or removed based on law, what kind of people are allowed to vote and what other rights they are guaranteed, and how the constitution can be changed.
Limits are put on the Government in how much power they have within the Constitution "(see Rule of Law )". On the other hand, countries with repressive or corrupt governments frequently do not stick to their constitutions, or have bad constitutions without giving freedom to citizens and others. This can be known as dictatorship or simply "bending the rules". A Constitution is often a way of uniting within a Federation.
The UK's constitution is not written in one single document like many other countries' are. In fact, the UK's constitution is not completely written down at all. Some of it can be found in writing, starting with the Magna Carta of 1215 and the Bill of Rights Act 1689 and including more modern Acts of Parliament. Other parts of it are considered common law and are made up of the decisions of judges over many hundreds of years in a system called legal or judicial precedence. Because of this, some people say that the United Kingdom has a "de facto" or "unwritten" constitution.
The United States in 1787 began a trend in the writing of constitutions. The United States Constitution is also the shortest that people are still using, and it has been changed (amended) many times over the years. It was made after the colonists won their independence from Britain. At first they had the Articles of Confederation but the Articles were replaced with today's Constitution.
The Indian constitution is the longest ever written constitution in the world. It has 395 Articles and 12 Schedules in it, divided into 22 parts. It has been amended more than 100 times.

</doc>
<doc id="175" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=175" title="Circle">
Circle

A circle is a round, regular, two-dimensional shape, shaped like the letter o.
The centre of a circle is the point in the very middle.
The radius of a circle is a line from the centre of the circle to a point on the side. 
All points on the edge of the circle are at the same distance from the centre. In other words, the radius is the same length all the way around the circle. Mathematicians use the letter "r" for the length of a circle's radius.
The diameter (meaning "all the way across") of a circle is a straight line that goes from one side to the opposite and right through the centre of the circle. Mathematicians use the letter "d" for the length of this line.
The diameter of a circle is equal to twice its radius ("d" equals 2 times "r").
The circumference (meaning "all the way around") of a circle is the line that goes around the centre of the circle. Mathematicians use the letter "C" for the length of this line.
The number "π" (written as the Greek letter "pi") is a very useful number. It is the length of the circumference divided by the length of the diameter ("π" equals "C" divided by "d"). As a fraction the number π is equal to about or 335/113 (which is closer) and as a number it is about 3.1415926535.
The area, "a", inside a circle is equal to the radius multiplied by itself, then multiplied by π ("a" equals π times "r" times "r").
Calculating π.
π can be measured by drawing a large circle, then measuring its diameter ("d") and circumference ("C"). This is because the circumference of a circle is always π times its diameter.
π can also be calculated by only using mathematical methods. Most methods used for calculating the value of π have desirable mathematical properties. However, they are hard to understand without knowing trigonometry and calculus. However, some methods are quite simple, such as this form of the Gregory-Leibniz series:
While that series is easy to write and calculate, it is not easy to see why it equals π. An easier to understand approach is to draw an imaginary circle of radius r centered at the origin. Then any point ("x","y") whose distance d from the origin is less than r, calculated by the pythagorean theorem, will be inside the circle:
Finding a set of points inside the circle allows the circle's area A to be estimated. For example, by using integer coordinates for a big r. Since the area A of a circle is π times the radius squared, π can be approximated by using:

</doc>
<doc id="176" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=176" title="Capitalization">
Capitalization

Capitalise (British spelling) or capitalize (North American spelling) means to make one or more letters upper case. The first letter of a sentence is capitalised in many languages, as are the first letters of proper nouns such as names of people and places. In German, however, all nouns are capitalized. It is the only language to do that.
The homonym capitalize is a different word, and means "to fully fund as an investment".
 "This can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".</div >

</doc>
<doc id="178" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=178" title="Cuba">
Cuba

For the town of Cuba in New York State, USA, see Cuba (town), New York.
Cuba is an island country in the Caribbean Sea. The country is made up of the big island of Cuba, the Isla de la Juventud island ("Isle of Youth"), and many smaller islands. Havana is the capital of Cuba. It is the largest city. The second largest city is Santiago de Cuba. In Spanish, the capital is called "La Habana". Cuba is near the United States, Mexico, Haiti, Jamaica and the Bahamas. People from Cuba are called Cubans. The official language is Spanish. Cuba has a warm climate, but has many hurricanes every year.
In 1492, Christopher Columbus landed on the island of Cuba. He claimed it for the Kingdom of Spain. Cuba became a Spanish colony until the Spanish–American War of 1898. After the war, it was part of the United States. It gained independence in 1902.
In 1959, guerilla fighters led by Fidel Castro and Che Guevara overthrew Cuba 's dictator Fulgencio Batista in what became the 'Cuban Revolution'. Castro began making relations with the Soviet Union and tried to close a lot of American businesses in Cuba; the United States did not like this. In 1961 Castro officially announced that his government was socialist. The US attempted to invade Cuba to regain control of it and overthrow it's communist led government but failed. The communist party was created in 1965 and has ruled the island ever since.
Culture.
Cuba is famous for many types of music, especially dance music such as the Salsa and Mambo. Because Cubans come from Spain, Africa, South America and North America, Cuban music is special and different.
Reading is very popular in Cuba. Many people especially enjoy reading books or things that come from outside the country, even though the government does not approve of this. They also love music and sports. Cuban music is very lively. This is because a lot of it comes from African and Spanish rhythms. Baseball, basketball, and athletics events are loved by many Cuban people. The Cuban football-team took at one Football-World-Cup part. In 1938, they reached the quartar-final and lost against Sweden 0:8.
History.
Early history.
Before Cuba was conquered by the Spaniards, three tribes lived on the island. They were the Taínos, the Ciboneys, and the Guanajatabeyes. The Taínos were the largest and most common of the three tribes. They farmed crops such as beans, corn, squash, and yams. The Taínos also slept in hammocks which the Spaniards would introduce to the rest of the world. Then, in 1492, Christopher Columbus arrived in Cuba on his first trip to the Americas. Three years later he claimed the islands for the Spanish. The Spanish began to rule Cuba afterwards. The Spanish brought thousands of slaves from Africa to Cuba to work for them. Most of the native Cubans died because of the new diseases brought by the Spanish and Africans. The Spanish also treated the native Cubans very cruelly and massacred many of them.
The Spanish ruled for many years. Cuba became the most important producer of sugar. In the early 1800s, Cubans rebelled against the Spanish rulers, but failed until 1898, when the United States went to war with the Spanish and defeated them. Cuba became American for four years afterwards, before it became an independent republic in 1902. Even though Cuba was independent, the Americans still controlled the island by a law called the Platt Amendment. In 1933 the Cubans stopped the Platt Amendment, but the Americans still had a big say in Cuban politics. Americans owned most of Cuba’s businesses. The Americans supported the leader Fulgencio Batista, who was seen by many Cubans as corrupt.
Cuban Revolution.
In 1959, Fidel Castro led a revolution against Fulgencio Batista. Castro took power in Cuba with Che Guevara from Argentina, his brother Raul, and others who fought against Batista. Castro made many changes to Cuba. He ended American ownership of Cuban businesses. This made Castro unpopular in America and the United States banned all contact with Cuba. Many Cubans went to America because of this. In 1961, the Americans helped some of these Cubans to attack Cuba and try to remove Castro, but they failed. Castro then asked the Soviet Union to help defend them from the Americans, which they did. The Soviet Union put nuclear weapons in Cuba and aimed them at the United States. American President Kennedy demanded that they be removed or a new war would begin. This was known as the "Cuban Missile Crisis". The Soviet Union removed the missiles when the United States agreed to not continue attacking Cuba and to remove missiles from Turkey.
Cuba became a communist-led country like the Soviet Union after this. The Soviet Union bought most of Cuba’s sugar for expensive prices. Cuba spent this money on health, education and the army. This made Cuba’s schools and hospitals some of the best in the world. The army fought in Africa to support black Africans against the white South African army. Cuba also supported groups in South America fighting against the dictators of those countries.
However, the Cuban government began to control most of life in Cuba under the communist system. Disagreeing with the Cuban government and Fidel Castro in public was not allowed. Some Cubans did not like this and tried to leave Cuba. Most Cubans who left went to the United States. Some Cubans who did not like the government and stayed were put in jail. Many groups from around the world protested against Cuba because of this, and demanded that Fidel Castro give up power.
In 1991, the Soviet Union collapsed. This meant that Cuba, which had sold most of its products to the Soviet Union, had no money coming into the country. The Americans made the restrictions against contact with Cuba tighter. America said the restrictions on contact would continue unless Fidel Castro gave up power. Cuba became very poor in the 1990s. This became known in Cuba as “The Special Period”. Because of the disaster, Cuba changed to allow less control by the government, more discussion amongst the people, and private shops and businesses. Cuba also tried to get tourists to visit the island.
In the 2000s, tourism to Cuba began to make money for the island again. Though Fidel Castro had remained in power, he had passed all duties to his brother Raul after an illness. Fidel Castro was one of the longest-serving heads of state. In 2008, Raúl Castro became the official president of Cuba.
In April 2015, historic talks took place with US President Obama and Cuban General Secretary Raúl Castro in improving relations between the two nations.
The trade embargo issued by President Kennedy in the 1960s has been considerably loosened under Obama's administration. US citizens can now travel directly to Cuba at certain times of the year. Before, Americans had to go via Mexico if the wanted to go to Cuba. Americans are still not allowed to purchase or smoke Cuban cigars. The cigars are smuggled over the US-Canadian border since they are legal in Canada.
For military service, men from the age of 16 to 49 years old must go into the army.
Demographics.
The population of Cuba is close to 13 million. The people of Cuba come from three different groups. The largest group is the descendants of the Spanish settlers who came to Cuba. The smallest group is the descendants of the black African slaves who were brought in to do the work and birth children (in the barracoon) as New World slaves who could be legally sold into life time bondage in the United States. The middle-sized group is a mix of African and Spanish. The government succeeded in seeing that the three different groups were treated the same. According to a DNA Caribbean Studies Institute, the racial-makeup of the population of Cuba is:
Health and education.
Cuba is a developing country, and is often depicted as a very poor country. In some aspects, however, like education, health care and life expectancy it ranks much better than most countries in Latin America. Its infant death rate is lower than some developed countries. The average life expectancy is 78 years.
All the children are required to go to school from six to twelve years old, and nearly everybody is able to read and write at least. There is free education at every level. Because of this, Cuba has a 99.8% literacy rate.
In 2006, the World Food Programme certified Cuba to be the only country in this region without undernourished children. In the same year, the United Nations said that Cuba was the only nation in the world that met the World Wide Fund for Nature's definition of sustainable development.
Geography.
Cuba is the largest island in the West Indies. It has many resources. Only about one-fourth of the land is mountains or hills. Much of the land is gentle hills or plains which are good for farming or raising cattle. Cuba has fertile soil and a warm climate that makes it great for growing crops.
Sugar is the most important crop of Cuba, and they may get it from the sugar cane. Sugar cane is the largest cash crop grown in Cuba, and it brings in most of the money. After that, the second is tobacco. Tobacco is made into cigars by hand. A hand-made cigar is considered by many people to be the finest in the world. Other important crops are rice, coffee, and fruit. Cuba also has many minerals. Cobalt, nickel, iron, copper, and manganese are all on the island. Salt, petroleum, and natural gas are there too. The coast of Cuba has many bays and a few good harbors. Havana, which is the capital, is also a port. Other harbors have port cities. Nuevitas is a port city on the north coast. Cienfuegos, Guantánamo, and Santiago de Cubaare some of the port cities on the south coast.
Cuba has a semi-tropical climate. That means that the cool ocean winds keep it becoming hot, despite its being in the tropiocal zone. Cuba has a wet season and a dry season. The dry season is from November to April, and the wet season is from May to October. August to October is also the hurricane season in the Atlantic Ocean. Because of this, most of Cuba's port cities can be flooded along the coast. also found in Cuba is the S.M.A assosiation lead by rohit.

</doc>
<doc id="180" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=180" title="Cube">
Cube

A cube is a block with all right angles and whose height, width and depth are all the same. 
A cube is one of the simplest mathematical shapes in space. Something that is shaped like a cube is sometimes referred to as "cubic".
Relative 2-dimensional shape.
The basic difference between a cube and a square is, a cube is a 3D figure (having 3 dimensions i.e. length, breadth and height while a square has only 2 dimensions i.e. length and breadth.
The 2-dimensional (2D) shape (like a circle, square, triangle, etc.) that a cube is made of is squares. The sides (faces) of a cube are squares. The edges are straight lines. The corners (vertices) are at right angles. A cube has 8 corners, 12 edges and 6 sides.example dice having six number denotes 6 faces. A tesseract carries this idea into the fourth dimension (4D) and is made of 8 cubes. 

</doc>
<doc id="182" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=182" title="Cost of living">
Cost of living

Template codice_1 has been incorrectly substituted.
Cost of living is the amount of money it costs just to live in a certain place. It includes food, housing, etc.
 "This can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".</div >

</doc>
<doc id="185" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=185" title="December">
December

December is the twelfth and last month of the year in the Gregorian calendar, with 31 days, coming between November (of the same year) and January (of the next year). With the name of the month coming from the Latin "decem" for "ten", it was the tenth month of the year before January and February were added to the Roman calendar.
December begins on the same day of the week as September, and ends on the same day as April, every year.
December's flower is the Narcissus. Its birthstone is the turquoise. The meaning of the turquoise is prosperity.
Some of the holidays celebrated in December are Christmas, New Year's Eve, Kwanzaa, and Hanukkah.
The Month.
December is the 12th and last month of every calendar year in the Gregorian calendar, and is one of seven months of the year to have 31 days. December 31 is followed by January 1 of the following year. It begins on the same day of the week as September every year, as September 1 and December 1 are exactly 13 weeks (91 days) apart. It ends on the same day as April of the same year. If the following year is a leap year, then March of that year would start and end on the same day of the week as December of the year that came before. November of the following year would then start on the same day of the week as December of the current year. If the following year is a common year, then December of the current year starts on the same day of the week as June of that year.
The month of December has a solstice, and in this month the Tropic of Capricorn in the Southern Hemisphere is turned towards the Sun, meaning that December 21 or December 22 is the Northern Winter Solstice and the Southern Summer Solstice. This means that this date would have the least daylight of any day in the Northern Hemisphere, and the most in the Southern Hemisphere. There are 24 hours of darkness at the North Pole and 24 hours of daylight at the South Pole. In each hemisphere, December is the seasonal equivalent of June in the other.
In mainly Christian countries, December is dominated by Christmas, which is celebrated on December 25 in most of those countries, though Eastern Orthodox Christians celebrate it on January 7. It marks the birth of Jesus Christ. Epiphany, January 6, is also important in relation to Christmas. Advent starts on the Sunday on, or closest to, November 30, and some countries have their own related celebration before the 25th. Sinterklaas is celebrated on December 5 in the Netherlands and Belgium, and St. Nicholas Day on December 6 is also celebrated in some countries. The Scandinavian countries, mainly Sweden, celebrate St. Lucia Day on December 13, while Iceland celebrates Thorlaksmessa on December 23. The week after Christmas is spent preparing for New Year.
Judaism's festival of light, Hanukkah, is also celebrated over eight days in this month.

</doc>
<doc id="186" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=186" title="Dublin">
Dublin

For the town in the U.S. state of Virginia, see Dublin, Virginia.
Dublin is the capital city of Ireland. The Greater Dublin Area has a population of 1,187,176 people. Dublin is also the biggest city on the island of Ireland.
Dublin was built by the Vikings and is built upon the river Liffey.
The river divides the city into two parts, North Dublin and South Dublin.
Many famous writers lived in Dublin. Oscar Wilde and George Bernard Shaw were born in Dublin. James Joyce is probably Dublin's best known and most international writer.
Dublin is home to Ireland's largest stadium, Croke Park. It can hold up to 85,000 people. Croke Park is the usual venue for all Ireland hurling and football finals.

</doc>
<doc id="187" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=187" title="Dance">
Dance

Dance is when people move to a musical rhythm. They may be alone, or in a group. The dance may be an informal play, a part of a ritual, or a part of a professional performance. There are many kinds of dances, and every human society has its own dances.
Dancing is a not a sport, though it does have some athletic aspects. Dance is an art. Some people dance to express their feelings and emotions. Other people dance to feel better. Dance can be used to tell a story. In some societies, dance goes with song as well as music. People who want to learn to dance can go to dance schools. It may take years of practice to become an experienced and flexible dancer.
To plan a dance is called "choreography", done by a choreographer. Often this goes with music, and fits into a certain style. Dances may be planned in detail, or they may be whatever dancers feel like doing. However, most dancing does follow some general style or pattern. One style is the couple dance, where (usually) a man and a woman dance together. Other dances need a whole group of people together to make it work.
History.
People have always danced. Every society has its own dances. We have pictures, on pottery and stone, which show dances from several thousand years ago, in Egypt and Greece.Chapter 5
Sachs divides early dances into 'Imageless dances' and 'Image dances'. By 'imageless dances' he meant dances which have no set form, but aim at getting the dancers into a state of ecstasy. In this state the dancer(s) seem changed, in a trance, and are often thought of (by their society) as being 'possessed by spirits'. These dances are done on certain occasions: marriage, war, famine, illness or death, and so on. They are found in all early ('primitive') societies.p49; 62
The 'image dances', according to Sachs, are to do with the world outside the dancer. By imitating an animal or object, the dancer believes he can capture a power and make it useful. To dance in imitation of the animal which is going to be hunted is to become one with them. To imitate the act of sex is to achieve fertility. This is the kind of thinking behind an image dance. Sachs points out that societies of this kind do not really understand the connection between cause and effect. They really believe the image dances work. The dance type which is used in image dances is mime.p49; 77
The two styles of dance may be joined together. Fertility dances may involve both ecstatic states and mime. The great dancer Nijinsky used some of these ideas in his choreography for the ballet "Le Sacre du Printemps" (The Rite of Spring), a ballet about the sacrifice of a girl during a primitive celebration of Spring.
Coming to more recent times, the first dance school we know about was opened in 1661 in Paris. Only men were accepted until 1681. After 1681, women were accepted too. Ballroom dances are forms of modern dance. Ballroom dances such as the waltz are done by couples.
Until the 20th century, most ballroom dances were sequence dances. The way people moved was planned in set formation. These formations were usually lines or squares. Everyone moved at the same time, and finished at the same time. The music played for a set time, and then stopped. After the invention of the waltz, around 1800, another style of dancing developed. In the waltz, and later dances, people danced in couples, but they did so separately. They did not dance in formation, but moved round the room as they pleased (but anti-clockwise). Now, once again, new dance styles have arrived. Some people dance as individuals, separately as they please. Street dance is like that. But all these types of dance have music.
At the same time, round the world there are many traditional dances. Some of them have been going for hundreds of years. We call them folkloric dances.
Styles.
There are many different styles of dance, which fall into these general types:

</doc>
<doc id="188" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=188" title="Dissolution of the monasteries">
Dissolution of the monasteries

The Dissolution of the monasteries was an event that happened from 1536 to 1540, when English King Henry VIII took away the land and money that the nuns and monks of the Roman Catholic church owned. Henry VIII then gave this land and money to people that supported him.
This was also when Henry VIII made himself the new head of the Church of England (which is a type of Christianity).
It all started when Henry VIII wanted to get a divorce but was refused by the Pope.
Listen to this article · <br>
This audio file was created from an article revision dated 19 July 2006, and does not play the most recent changes to the article. ()
More spoken articles
<indicator name="top-icon"></indicator>
He decided to create his own religion - the Church of England.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="190" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=190" title="Deadline">
Deadline

A deadline is a time by which some task must be completed.
Very often, it means a time limit that is set in place by an authority - for example, a teacher tells students that they must turn in their homework in by a certain time. This is so the teacher is able to report fairly to his or her principal that every student had the same chance to do the work.
Deadlines may also be set by a time horizon that comes from something that is not a human authority, but part of nature. For example, by sunset one must do those tasks requiring daylight. However, a human must watch the sun and decide what light is strong enough to still be daylight, so time limits will still be involved even if one observes a horizon and sets a deadline oneself.
A way to remember this is that a time horizon is like the physical horizon where sunset happens and a time limit is a thing people set up to deal with this. A deadline is a thing powerful people set up to ensure less powerful people comply with their way of doing things.

</doc>
<doc id="191" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=191" title="Dutton's Speedwords">
Dutton's Speedwords

Dutton Speedwords is a made-up language written by Reginald John Garfield Dutton. The idea of Dutton Speedwords is to make frequent words short, and very frequent words very short. Dutton Speedwords can be used as a second language for international communications. Dutton Speedwords is also a shorthand writing system – this means you can use it to write quickly. 
The method was made up by Reginald John Garfield Dutton (1886-1970) in 1922. It was first published in 1935. It was called "International Symbolic Script". A year later, it was called "Speedwords". It was changed in 1946 and 1951.
It has two uses; to be a language and to be used for writing quickly. Dutton hoped that this would mean more people would learn it because they could use it for two reasons.
The books that Dutton wrote about Speedwords are not printed anymore. But Speedwords is now being used by more people because they find it is good for working online. For example, it makes it faster to type an email.
Another way of writing quickly is Pitman's shorthand. This uses special symbols instead of letters. Speedwords uses Roman letters. This makes it easier to learn. It also means it can be typed using a normal keyboard. Each word means only one thing. This means you do not need to use different forms of the same word.
The words used in Speedwords are the same as the words used in many other languages. The words are like short versions of the writer's own language.

</doc>
<doc id="195" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=195" title="Devil">
Devil

In some religions, the devil is a bad spirit that tries to create problems for people. Some people also use the words "the Devil" or "Satan" for the most powerful devil. The word "devil" comes from the Greek word "diabolos" which means "someone who tells lies to hurt you". ("Diabolos" is translated to the English word "slanderer.") The New Testament uses "diabolos" as a title for Satan, and so "The Devil" became another name for Satan in English.
In the Old Testament, there is the serpent and the shaitan, who may be two different characters. "Shaitan" in Hebrew means "adversary", an enemy or opponent. Shaitan is also the word used for the devil in the Koran, who often appears as an animal and tries to get people to do the wrong thing.
In Christianity the Devil was originally an angel in heaven called Lucifer. But he wanted to be the ruler of heaven and so he revolted against God. After a hard fight he was defeated and thrown out of heaven. Some other angels who helped him were also thrown out.
After the Devil was thrown out of heaven, he started doing bad things on the earth. He wants people to worship him instead of God. Sometimes he tries to trick people by giving them false promises.
The other angels who were thrown out of heaven became evil spirits called demons. They obey the Devil and help him do evil things.
The Book of Revelation says that God will punish the Devil and his demons by throwing them into a Lake of Fire that burns in Hell. This will happen in the future.
Artists draw pictures of the Devil that show him as ugly and evil. But nobody knows what he may look like. Usually he is a spirit that nobody can see, but he can make himself look like a real person in order to trick people. Many modern depictions of the devil portray him as a red human-like being with horns and a pointed tail, carrying a red pitchfork.
Not all religions believe in the devil. For example, Buddhists do not believe in the devil. Many satanists believe in the devil or Satan only as a metaphor, not an actual being or person.

</doc>
<doc id="196" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=196" title="Diarrhea">
Diarrhea

Template codice_1 has been incorrectly substituted.
Diarrhea (DIE-uh-REE-uh), also spelled diarrhoea, happens when the body makes more watery feces than normal. In a baby it is the most common symptom of malnutrition. This means not eating enough, or well enough. Diarrhea can occur in humans as well as most other mammals.
Diarrhea is not a disease. It is a condition that a body can be in. However, there are many diseases that can cause your body to have diarrhea. Most are temporary and related to diet - the food you eat. Food safety and hand washing can lower the risk of getting diarrhea. Stress and drinking too much alcohol or caffeine can also cause diarrhea.
In developing nations, malnutrition is a common cause of child death. Part of the deaths from malnutrition are caused by diarrhea. Another way diarrhea can kill you is by dehydration (losing too much water in the body). Because diarrhea is watery in nature, it takes away a lot of the water in your body. Diarrhea is often treated with aspirin or glucose - these reduce pain and may stop some symptoms for a while. However, if it was because of malnutrition, it will not save the child's life. Spending money on rehydrating salts 
 
 
[], clean water, and more food is the most direct way to cure diarrhea from malnutrition.
The opposite of diarrhea, firm feces, is often a sign of good digestive health, however having feces that is too dry or hard is called constipation and can lead to other medical problems. Some people adopt vegetarian diets with high dietary fibre to prevent diarrhea and other digestive problems.

</doc>
<doc id="199" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=199" title="Dimension">
Dimension

Dimensions are a concept from mathematics and physics: One way to define a dimension is to look at the degrees of freedom a movement has in in a specific space. There are different concepts where the term dimension is used and there are also different definitons. There is no definition that can satisfy all concepts. 
In a vector space, a dimension is equal to the cardinality of the minimal generator. It is also equal to the cardinality of the maximal set of linearly independent vectors of that space. "Normal" objects in everyday life are specified by three dimenensions, which are usually called length, width and depth. Mathematicians call this concept Euclidean space.
Dimensions can be used to measure position too. The distance to a position from a starting place can be measured in the length, width and height directions. These distances are a measure of the position.
Sometimes a fourth (4D) dimension, time, is used to show the position of an event in time and space.
Other Dimensions.
In modern science, people use other dimensions.
Dimensions like temperature and weight can be used to show the position of something in less simple spaces.
Mathematicians also use dimensions. In mathematics, dimensions are more general. Dimensions in mathematics might not measure things in the world. The rules for doing arithmetic with dimensions in mathematics might be different than usual arithmetic rules.
Dimensions and vectors.
Vectors are used to show distances and directions. Vectors are often used in engineering and science, and sometimes in mathematics.
A vector is a list of numbers. There is one number for each dimension. There are arithmetic rules for vectors.
For example, if Jane wants to know the position of Sally, Sally can give Jane a vector to show the position. If Jane and Sally are in the world, there are three dimensions. Therefore, Sally gives Jane a list of three numbers to show her position. The three numbers in the vector Sally gives Jane might be:

</doc>
<doc id="203" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=203" title="Distance">
Distance

Distance is how far one thing is from another thing. Distance is a measure of the space between two things.
Displacement.
Distance is different from displacement. Displacement is the difference between a starting point and a finishing point. It has both a distance and a direction.
Example of Displacement.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="204" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=204" title="Depth">
Depth

Template codice_1 has been incorrectly substituted.
Depth in Mathematics.
In math, the distance between the nearest end and farthest end of an object is its depth.
For example, Jane measures a box. When she measures the distance between the end of the box closest to her and the end of the box farthest away, Jane measures the box's depth.
"See"
Depth in Liquids.
For liquids, the distance between the top or surface of the liquid and the bottom of the liquid is the liquid's depth.
For example, water is a liquid. If you fill a container with water, the distance between the top of the water and the bottom of the container is the water's depth. If the depth is big we say the water is deep. 

</doc>
<doc id="206" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=206" title="Dictionary">
Dictionary

A dictionary is a book which explains the meanings of words or, more precisely, lexemes. The words are arranged in alphabetical order so that they can be found quickly. The word “dictionary” comes from the Latin “dictio” (“saying”).
There are several types of dictionaries: dictionaries which explain words and how they are used, dictionaries which translate words from one language to another, dictionaries of biography which tell about famous people, technical dictionaries which explain the meanings of technical words or words connected to a particular subject (sometimes called a thesaurus). Some of these come close to being an encyclopedia, but an encyclopedia gives a lot of extra information about things (knowledge) and does not explain the use of the language. An encyclopedic dictionary gives less information about the topic than a real encyclopedia does, but more than a simple dictionary.
Dictionaries which explain the meaning of words.
Dictionaries which explain what words mean will give a clear "definition" of the word (e.g. hippopotamus : a hoofed mammal with thick skin, large mouth and short legs that lives in rivers and lakes of Africa.) 
A big dictionary will also give more information about the word. It will explain how it is pronounced. Usually the International Phonetic Alphabet is used for this. It will explain how the word is used. This is not a problem for a word like "hippopotamus", but a word like "put" has so many different meanings that a large dictionary may have a whole page or more to explain how it can be used. It will also explain what language the word comes from (e.g. Greek "hippos" horse and "potamus" river).
A dictionary may also give the form of the word in different tenses, plural form etc.
Dictionaries which translate into foreign languages.
There are also dictionaries which translate words into foreign languages. Very often one volume (one book) will translate both ways, so half the book will be translating from English to Dutch and the other half from Dutch to English.
When using a dictionary to find out how to say something in another language one has to be careful to choose the right word. A word like “right” has two basic meanings in English: 1) “correct”, and 2) the opposite of “left”. Other languages are not like English: they will have different words for these different meanings. A word like “put” has many meanings. A good dictionary will have a large list of these meanings to help people find the word they want. In many languages, for example, the word “put” will be different according to whether something is being put onto something (e.g. a table) or into something (e.g. a cupboard).
Updating dictionaries.
Dictionaries need to be updated frequently because of the way language changes. New words are often brought into a language (e.g. lots of computer terms) or words change their meanings (e.g. “gay” or “cool”). The most famous English Dictionary is the Oxford English Dictionary (or OED). Words are always being added to the OED, they are never taken out even if they are obsolete (not used any more). The OED can be accessed online (with a subscription).

</doc>
<doc id="207" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=207" title="Definition">
Definition

A definition is an exact word or phrase of the meaning, nature, or limits of something. A definition usually answers the question "what". "Defining" means giving a definition. Other words with this meaning are "description" and "explanation". It describes what a word means and explains to the person when and where it can be used.
In mathematics, a definition is an exact way of saying what something is. It might not be the easiest way to say what it is, but it is used because it is exact. It can be used in a mathematical proof about the thing.
 "This can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".</div >

</doc>
<doc id="208" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=208" title="Denmark">
Denmark

Denmark (Danish: "Danmark" 
 
), officially named the Kingdom of Denmark, is a Nordic country in Northern Europe. It is the furthest south of the Scandinavian countries, to the south of Norway and south-west of Sweden (which it is connected to by a bridge). It has a south border with Germany. It borders both the North Sea to the west and the Baltic Sea to the east. Denmark is a developed country with a large welfare state; In 2006 and 2007, surveys ranked Denmark as "the happiest place in the world," based on standards of health, welfare, and education.
The capital city of Denmark is Copenhagen, on the island of Sealand. Denmark is a constitutional monarchy (meaning the head of state is a monarch who has few established powers) with a queen, Margrethe II. Denmark is a parliamentary state, meaning the people appoint a parliament to make decisions for them, and it has a democratic government headed by an elected Prime Minister, who currently is Katrine Monrad.
In geography, "Denmark" is the land in northern Europe, where the Danes live. In the political sense, the "Kingdom of Denmark" also includes the Faroe Islands in the Atlantic Ocean, and Greenland in North America. All three parts of the country have different languages and culture.
History.
Denmark was first united in the 10th century, during the Viking period, by the king Harald Bluetooth (c. 985), who first converted Denmark to Christianity. The Vikings are well known for invading countries. In the 11th century, the Danish Vikings controlled England (the Danelaw) for a while. In 1397 Denmark, Sweden and Norway became a single country with one queen (this country was called the "Kalmar Union") Sweden became a separate country again in 1523. Denmark and Norway (called "Denmark-Norway)" stayed united, until 1814. Denmark-Norway controlled many islands in the Atlantic Ocean, including the Faroe Islands, Iceland and Greenland. Iceland became independent from Denmark in 1944.
Denmark became a constitutional monarchy in June 5, 1849 when it adopted a constitution which took away powers from the King and gave rights to ordinary Danish people. June 5 is now a holiday in Denmark, called "Constitution Day".
Over the years Denmark lost many of lands that it controlled in battle. Denmark's biggest war defeat was the "Second Schleswig War" (in 1864) when the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein was conquered by the Kingdom Prussia (now a part of Germany). This was a big loss for Denmark and, consequently, it began a policy of neutrality after the loss, meaning it would no longer take part in any wars or support other countries. Denmark did not take part in the First World War. 
On April 9, 1940, Denmark was invaded by Nazi Germany and the Nazis stayed in Denmark throughout World War II. During the war, in 1943, Danes helped over 8,000 Jews to escape from Denmark into Sweden after the Nazis tried to arrest them. 
After the liberation of Denmark, one part of the country was not. That was the island of Bornholm. The German Commandant "von Kamptz" who was stationed there, refused to surrender to the Soviets as the German were fleeing to Bornholm and further to Sweden. The Soviets then bombed the two biggest towns Rønne and Nexø. After the Germans were captured on May 9, 1945, the Soviet Army occupied the island until April 6, 1946.
After World War Two, Denmark became a member of NATO and the European Union. Greenland and the Faroe Islands are now part of the "Kingdom of Denmark" and have their own governments and limited power.
Government and politics.
Denmark has three branches of power; the judiciary (the courts), the executive (the Prime Minister and the cabinet) and the legislature (the Danish parliament). The current Prime Minister of Denmark is Helle Thorning-Schmidt, who was elected in September 2011 She is the first woman prime minister of Denmark.
Denmark is a Kingdom which means it has a monarch (a king or queen). The current monarch is Queen Margrethe II. Margrethe II does not have a lot of power (she does not make any important decisions) and has a symbolic role. Denmark became a constitutional monarchy in 1849.
Elections to the parliament are held every four years, and the winner of the election is the party or coalition which gets the most votes and seats in the parliament. After the elections are done, several parties who are in agreement will group together to form a coalition government, and the leader of the largest party becomes the prime minister.
Here is a short summary of the biggest political parties in Denmark, from left to right on the political axis:
Welfare.
Denmark, like the other Nordic countries. is well known for being a large welfare state. The government provides many services to the public such as free health care, free education (school and college) and free housing for the poor. Danes pay high taxes to fund welfare.
Geography.
Denmark is the smallest of the Scandinavian countries. The neighbours are Germany (to the south), Sweden (to the east), Norway (to the north) and the United Kingdom (to the west). The country is surrounded by the sea except for Jutland ("Jylland"), the largest part of Denmark. It is connected to Germany by land. To the south-east there is the Baltic Sea, to the west the North Sea, to the north the Skagerrak and to the north-east the Kattegat.
The western part of Denmark is the peninsula of Jutland (Danish: "Jylland" 
 
, pronounced "yoo´-land"), bordering Germany. This is the only part of Denmark that is not an island. The rest of Denmark includes 76 islands people live on, and many tiny islands. The largest islands are Zealand ("Sjælland"), and Funen ("Fyn"). To the east is the island of Bornholm in the Baltic Sea, the only place in Denmark where the bedrock can be seen.
The country is quite flat. The highest hill or mountain is Møllehøj, which is 170.86 metres (560.56 ft) tall. There are many small hills, lakes, creeks, forests and farmland. Denmark's shore line covers 7,314 km (4,545 mi). Nobody in Denmark lives more than 60 km from the coast.
Climate.
The weather in Denmark is quite windy and rainy. In the winter, it does not get very cold; in most years, there are only a few weeks of snow. Every ten years or so, the sea around the islands freezes over, but in most winters, it does not. The climate and topography are not good for winter sports.
Most summers are not very hot. People always dress to be ready for rain or wind. There are also very sunny times, but nobody can know ahead of time when these will be. The best time of the year for outdoor activities is the months of May and June until midsummer.
Regions and municipalities.
Denmark is divided into five regions (Danish: "regioner" or "region" for one). The regions replaced the former counties ("amter") in January 2007. The regions are in charge of hospitals and health care.
The regions are then subdivided into municipalities (Danish: "kommuner" 
 
). There are currently 98 municipalities, but before January 2007 there were 275. The number of municipalities was decreased when it was decided that, to become more efficient, each should have a population of at least 20,000 .
People.
The biggest part (90.5%) of Denmark's population of just under 5.4 million is of Danish descent, according to 2009 statistics. Of the rest 8.9% who are immigrants or descendent from recent immigrants, many come from South Asia or the Middle East. There are also small groups of Inuit from Greenland and Faroese.
The Danes speak the national language, Danish, which is very similar to the other Scandinavian languages. Swedish and Norwegian are so close to Danish that most Danes understand them. 
As well as Danish, most Danes speak a foreign language too, such as English, which is popular as an international language, or German. In the southern part of Jutland, a German minority speaks German. On the Faroe Islands, Faroese is spoken, and people living in Greenland speak Inuit. 
Religion does not play a large part in the life of most Danes and church attendance is very low. However, even though many Danes are atheist, 80.4% are members of the Protestant "Church of Denmark" (Danish: "Folkekirke" 
 
 (The National Church) which is the official "state church" of Denmark. The National Church is Lutheran, which means it separated from the Roman Catholic Church in the 16th Century. Other important faiths include Judaism, Islam (the number of Muslims is increasing), other Protestant groups and Catholicism.
Transport.
Because of the many islands, Denmark has many bridges. The main parts of the country, and most of the bigger islands, are connected by roads and railroads. One of the world's longest bridges connects the eastern and the western parts of the country, and there is a large bridge to Sweden also. There is still no bridge across the Baltic Sea to Germany, but it will most likely be built in a few years. The bridge to Sweden was expensive, took a long time to build, and required much planning by engineers.
There are still many islands with no bridges to the mainland. People have to go by boat or airplane to reach these islands. Many islands will never be reached by bridges, because they are too small or too far away. If the island has too few people, bridges are often not built because it is expensive to build. Somebody has to pay for it, nothing is free.
Cycling is very popular in Denmark because the ground is so flat. Copenhagen is a city that is very bicycle friendly, with bicycle lanes extending over 12,000 km.
Culture.
The people of Denmark have always depended on the sea. In earlier days, people could not travel anywhere unless they went by boat. Many Danes were fishermen or merchants. Even today, many Danes spend much time near or at the sea.
Farming has always been one of the main occupations. Because of the climate and the soil, Denmark is a good place for agriculture. Export of food to the neighbouring countries is one of the most important sources of income for the country. Danish hams and cookies are exported throughout the world.
Perhaps the most famous Dane is actually Hamlet, the title character of William Shakespeare's famous play, which was set in the real castle of Kronborg in Helsingør, north of Copenhagen. The play was based on an old Danish myth of the Viking Prince Amled of Jutland, and his quest for revenge against his father's killer. Another widely known Dane is Hans Christian Andersen, an author mostly famous for such fairy tales as "The Little Mermaid", and "The Ugly Duckling". Also Karen Blixen, Tycho Brahe and the philosopher Søren Kierkegaard are well-known world wide. There are many famous Danish scientists, including Niels Bohr, the famous physicist who developed the first working model for the atom, and Ole Rømer, who discovered the speed of light. Hans Kirk, although less well-known outside of Denmark, is the author of the best-selling Danish novel of all time, "The Fishermen".
Music.
Danes enjoy many different types of music, including ballets, jazz music, pop and rock. Denmark's most famous classical composer is Carl Nielsen. Famous Danish bands include Aqua, a pop band, and The Raveonettes, an indie rock band. The most famous Danish rock star is Lars Ulrich of the band Metallica. 
Food.
The cuisine of Denmark is like the other Nordic countries (Finland, Norway, Iceland, and Sweden), as well as that of northern Germany, consists mainly pork meat and fish. Traditional Danish food includes "frikadeller" (fried meatballs, often served with potatoes and various sorts of gravy). Fish is also widely eaten, especially on the west coast of Jutland.
Holidays.
Christmas (Danish: "Jul" 
 
) is the main feast of the year. Christmas is traditionally celebrated on the eve, December 24, and this is when the main Christmas meal is eaten and presents are unwrapped.
In midwinter, a fast is celebrated. Children are dressed up, and go from house to house begging for money. This practice has in the recent years been taken over by Halloween, and most people give candy not money. A barrel filled with candy is smashed with clubs. The person who makes the candy fall out is appointed queen of cats and the person who hits the last stick is appointed king of cats.
Midsummer is celebrated with a huge bonfire in the evening of June 23. Most Danes have a three week summer holiday in July or August.
Sports.
The most popular sport in Denmark is football (soccer). Sailing, swimming and other water sports are very popular because of the long coastline. Another common sport is cycling, (Copenhagen has been nicknamed the "City of Cyclists" because of the popularity of bicycles for moving around), which has become popular in Denmark partly because of the flat land all over the country. Indoor sports such as badminton and handball are also popular during the long winters.
Monarchy.
Monarch is a word that means king or queen. Denmark is the oldest monarchy in Europe. The current monarch is Queen Margrethe II, who has been the queen since 1972. Denmark does not currently have a King. Margrethe's husband is called a prince because he is the son-in-law, not the son, of the previous King. The royal couple have two children:
In 2008 Prince Joachim married for the second time. His new wife is from France and is called Marie, with whom he has a son and a daughter.

</doc>
<doc id="209" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=209" title="Death">
Death

"Die" redirects here. For the game-playing objects, see Dice. For death metal band, see Death (band).
Death is the end of life in an organism. All biological functions of the living thing stop, including the mind and the senses. The usual signal for death is that the heart stops beating and cannot be restarted. This can be caused by many things. All living things have a limited lifespan, and all living things eventually die.
Living things which have died are normally described as being dead. Death of humans is often investigated for the cause, in case of crime (such as murder) or disease that may continue to kill other humans. About 150,000 people die every day around the world. About two thirds of these people die because of age. In addition to the physical body, some believe humans also have a soul and believe that the soul can continue without a body (afterlife), move into another body (reincarnation), or cease to exist (annihilationism). Religions have different beliefs about this issue. Many cultures have their own customs and rituals to respect the dead.
When people talk about things or events that lead to the death of a plant or animal, those things or events are usually described as being deadly, or fatal. In the case of diseases, they are described as "terminal". Humans are no different from any other lifeform. Our bodies have an ability for self-repair, but that ability is limited. Finding the cause of death is a medical speciality called pathology. In medicine, death is when the heart stops beating for more than several minutes. There are special times in which people recover even though the heart has stopped for 30 minutes, such as near-drowning in very cold water. If machines are used to help the heart and lungs work, then the moment of death is more difficult to know.
Society and culture.
Death is commonly a sad or unpleasant thing to people. It can make people think about their own death. People might miss the person who has died. They might also be sad for the family and friends of the person who has died.
In any society, human death is surrounded by ritual - a wake or funeral is normal. In some places it was common to "eat" the dead in a form of ritual cannibalism. But this is no longer common, in part because disease like kuru can be passed this way. Human dead bodies are taboo in most societies and must be handled in special ways - for a combination of religious and hygiene reasons. A human dead body must always be reported in law, to be sure it is disposed of properly.
Dealing with dead bodies and their property.
Finding the cause of any human death and stopping a similar death from happening to someone else are the main reasons people look into "human morbidity" or let dead bodies be cut open and looked at in an autopsy. Some religions do not allow autopsies, because they feel the body is holy. Autopsies are usually required by the state if someone dies and people do not know why. The autopsy helps find out if someone killed the person on purpose, tried to hurt them, or if they died from a sickness.
To prepare for their own death, humans can write a last will and testament to be clear about who gets their property. A person will sometimes also volunteer to be an organ donor. This might mean giving the whole body to medical research. It can also save the lives of others by making organ transplants possible.
Religious views of death.
For a long time, many people have been afraid of death and a lot of people have wondered about what may happen to people after they die. This is one of the largest questions of philosophy and religion. Many people believe there is some form of afterlife.
Ancient rulers sometimes did insist not only that their own bodies, and much property, but even their servants and relatives be destroyed at their funeral. In India this ritual still does sometimes occur. Old women sometimes carry guns in case their husband's relatives come to throw them on the funeral fire.
Christianity has a special focus on death because of the state killing of Jesus Christ by the Romans. In Islam this is thought to demonstrate the injustice of human systems of dealing out death, and the ability of the best people to overcome it and even forgive it. In Christianity itself it is thought to prove that Jesus himself was really God and so could lose his body and still have the power of resurrection. In Buddhism reincarnation is believed to occur. Reincarnation is an idea taken from Hinduism.
Confucianism advises respect for parents and forms of ancestor worship to respect both dead and living ancestors.
Rituals surrounding death.
Every ethical tradition including the medical view of the body has some ritual surrounding death. Often these excuse behaviours that might be hated if they did not have the ritual. For instance, one may say that organ transplant is like cannibalism.
Very much of what happens at a human death is ritual. People who wish theirs to be dealt with a certain way, and who wish a particular treatment like cremation of their body, should decide in advance and set up the necessary payments and agreements. This makes it much easier for their family after they die, since there is no longer the ability to clearly communicate the wish.
For the same reason, saying goodbye is important. Most of the stress of death seems to come for loved ones who "did not have a chance to say goodbye".
Maybe it is to relieve this stress that rituals are created, and to bring together those that knew someone so that the personal experience a person can no longer communicate for themselves, can be exchanged by others.
Some ritual, such as seances, claim to allow people to speak to the dead. This is not claimed to be very reliable, both by scientists and even by those who do them very often.
Preparing for death.
Aside from wills, goodbyes, organ donations and funerals, there is important personal experience to decide to pass on, or not, when someone knows they may soon die. Palliative care focuses on basic decisions people make when they are very close to the end of their lives, and it ensures someone is always available to talk to them. It is a replacement for heroic medical intervention that may keep them physically alive but with no quality of life. Human psychology must prepare for death if it is anything other than a quick surprise:
Elizabeth Kubler-Ross wrote that there were several stages in dying, of which denial was the first, and acceptance was the last. Recording one's life is often something people with acceptance will do to leave a memoir or a full autobiography:
Because events leave living memory, and may only be part of oral tradition, there are projects to record everything that people remember about World War I and the Shoah. The first of these was to record everything remembered about the U.S. Civil War. This discipline has changed history since we have so many more first person accounts of the times, and made social history much more standard.
Other terms for death.
There are other terms for death. Examples are, "to pass away", "to go to a better place", "to buy the farm" (generally used in the military), "to leave the earth", and "to kick the bucket". the term "gone" may also be a term for describing death. "for example": if a person has died, they are also said to be "gone", as in "gone to a better place".

</doc>
<doc id="210" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=210" title="Diesel-electric">
Diesel-electric

A diesel-electric engine is a diesel engine that drives an electric generator. The generator feeds electric power to an electric motor which turns a driveshaft. Its efficiency is higher than when an engine drives a shaft through gears. Most locomotives and many ships use diesel-electric drive.
Many diesel-electric drives, especially small ones, store the electricity in a battery. Some designs also store braking energy in a flywheel, which can also charge a battery. However, these add even more complexity and weight to the vehicle, so are more appropriate for city driving where service stations are always available and there is much stop and go driving.
Because they do not require any change or investment in stations nor much in vehicle design, diesel-electric vehicles are believed to be the most likely replacement for today's internal combustion engine. When properly tuned, they have low emissions and they use only about one-third of the fossil fuel of most gasoline engines powering similar vehicles.
Honda and Toyota are presently delivering consumer priced diesel-electric cars. By contrast, hydrogen infrastructure is thought to be decades off, and is not fully implemented even in Iceland where there is abundant free geothermal electricity.
Many activists feel that promoting hydrogen is a stall, a way to avoid forcing the shift to diesel-electric vehicles in the nearer term.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="214" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=214" title="Embassy">
Embassy

A foreign embassy is the official office of one country in the capital of another country. It is where the ambassador (representative) of the home country works and it is where most of the communication (talk) between the two governments happen.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="216" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=216" title="Europe">
Europe

Europe is a continent, the western part of Eurasia. It is not part of Asia, because of a traditional eastern boundary that includes the Ural Mountains in Russia and the Bosporus in Turkey, and from Africa by the Mediterranean Sea to Balkans. The Atlantic Ocean is to the west of Europe. There are over 50 countries in Europe. Andreas M. Kaplan describes Europe as "embracing maximum cultural diversity at minimal geographical distances". The European Union is made up of most of the countries in Europe. The city with the most people in Europe is Istanbul.
Origin of Name.
Europe is named after a person in Greek mythology called Europa. She was said to have been abducted to Crete by Zeus. The name was later used for Greece. Then as the rest of the area we call Europe started to have cities and empires, the whole area West of the Ural Mountains became known by the same name.
Climate.
In Europe there are different climates in different places; for example, in the north like Finland it stays snowy in the winter for 5–6 months and is about -30 degrees Celsius. However, during winter in Spain it is warmer and hardly snows, except on high mountains.
European Union.
At this time, much of the continent shares some rulership in a body that is above any country, called the European Union.
History.
The history of Europe is long and has many turns. Individual specific 'eras' - this is the term meaning long amounts of specific time - can be mentioned:

</doc>
<doc id="217" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=217" title="Encyclopedia">
Encyclopedia

An encyclopedia (or "encyclopædia", "cyclopædia", "encyclopaedia") is a collection (usually a book) of information about things humans know. Whether it is published on paper or online, an encyclopedia is a collection of articles, each on a different subject. Encyclopedias are a great source of knowledge on many different topics.
The first encyclopedias may have begun as lecture notes of teachers of ancient schools, such as Aristotle’s school. Each volume in the encyclopedia was for a different subject or course of study. The word encyclopedia at first meant the teachings of the school. The name "encyclopedia" is from the 16th century.
After the printing press was invented, dictionaries with long definitions began to be called encyclopedias. For example, a dictionary of science, if it included essays, was thought of as an encyclopedia or knowledgeable book on the subject of science. Some encyclopedias then put essays on more than one subject in alphabetical order instead of grouping them together by subject. The word, encyclopedia, was put in the title of some encyclopedias. 
Companies were started for the purpose of publishing encyclopedias for the public use in libraries, which is different from when an encyclopedia was the curriculum of a private school. Like dictionaries, these publishers hired hundreds of experts to write articles and read and choose articles. Some internet encyclopedias allowed their paying customers to submit articles. Other internet encyclopedias accepted writing from non-paying users of the encyclopedia. 
Types of encyclopedias.
There are different types of encyclopedias. Some are general and have pages on lots of topics. The English language "Encyclopædia Britannica" and German "Brockhaus" are general encyclopedias. Some are about specific topics. For example, there are encyclopedias of medicine or philosophy. There are also some encyclopedias that have lots of topics with one perspective or one cultural bias. The "Great Soviet Encyclopedia" is one of these.
Many dictionaries have similar information to encyclopedias. Examples are the "Dictionary of National Biography", the "Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships", and "Black's Law Dictionary". Some are called "encyclopedic dictionaries".
There are two main ways of organizing printed encyclopedias: from A to Z (the alphabetical way) or by categories. Most encyclopedias go from A to Z.
All encyclopedias were printed, until the late 20th century when some were on CD-ROM. 21st century encyclopedias are mostly online by Internet.
The largest encyclopedia in the English language is English Wikipedia, which has more than 4 million articles. The second largest is the "Encyclopaedia Britannica", which is the largest one that is printed. Some languages have a larger printed encyclopedia. Stacy Schiff, a writer, says that Wikipedia is not as good as other encyclopedias because anyone can change it, so some people may write things that are wrong or biased. On the other hand, Tyler Cowen, an economist, says that other non-fiction writing may also have the same problems.

</doc>
<doc id="218" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=218" title="Earth science">
Earth science

Earth science is an all-embracing term for the sciences related to the planet Earth. Earth science may also be called geoscience. 
It is a broader term than geology because it includes aspects of planetary science, which is part of astronomy. The Earth sciences include the study of the atmosphere, oceans and biosphere, as well as the solid earth. Typically Earth scientists will use tools from physics, chemistry, biology, chronology and mathematics to understand the Earth, and how it evolved to its current state.
If there is one fact which underlies all Earth science it is this: the Earth is an ancient planet which has been changing the whole time since its formation. The extent of the changes is much greater than people used to think.
Fields of study.
The following disciplines are generally recognised as being within the geosciences:

</doc>
<doc id="219" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=219" title="Earth">
Earth

Earth is the third planet from the Sun and it is the only planet known to have life on it. The Earth formed around 4.5 billion years ago. It is one of four rocky planets on the inside of the Solar System. The other three are Mercury, Venus, and Mars.
The large mass of the Sun makes the Earth move around it, just as the mass of the Earth makes the Moon move around it. The Earth also turns round in space, so different parts face the Sun at different times. The Earth goes around the Sun once (one "year") for every 365¼ times it turns all the way around (one "day").
The Moon goes around the Earth about every 27⅓ days, and reflects light from the Sun. As the Earth goes round the Sun at the same time, the changing light of the Moon takes about 29½ days to go from dark to bright to dark again. That is where the idea of "month" came from. However, now most months have 30 or 31 days so they fit into one year.
The Earth is the only planet in our Solar System that has a large amount of liquid water. About 71% of the surface of the Earth is covered by oceans. Because of this, it is sometimes called the "Blue Planet".
Because of its water, the Earth is home to millions of species of plants and animals. The things that live on Earth have changed its surface greatly. For example, early cyanobacteria changed the air and gave it oxygen. The living part of the Earth's surface is called the "biosphere".
Orbit and turning.
The Earth is part of the eight planets and many thousands of small bodies that move around the Sun as its Solar System. The Solar System is moving through the Orion Arm of the Milky Way Galaxy now, and will be for about the next 10,000 years.
The Earth is generally 150,000,000 km away from the Sun (this distance is named an "Astronomical Unit"). The Earth moves along its way at an average speed of about 30 km a second. The Earth turns all the way around about 365¼ times in the time it takes for the Earth to go all the way around the Sun. To make up this extra bit of a day every year, an additional day is used every four years. This is named a "leap year".
The Moon goes around the Earth at an average distance of 250,000 mi. It is locked to Earth, so that it always has the same half facing the Earth; the other half is called the "dark side of the Moon". It takes about 27⅓ days for the Moon to go all the way around the Earth but, because the Earth is moving around the Sun at the same time, it takes about 29½ days for the Moon to go from dark to bright to dark again. This is where the word "month" came from, even though most months now have 30 or 31 days.
History of the Earth.
The Earth and the other planets formed about 4.6 billion years ago. They were made of the leftover gas from the nebula that made the Sun. The Moon may have been formed after a collision between the early Earth and a smaller planet (sometimes called "Theia"). Scientists believe that parts of both planets broke off — becoming (by gravity) the Moon.
Earth's water came from different places. Condensing water vapour, comets and asteroids hitting the Earth made the oceans. Within a billion years (that is at about 3.6 billion years ago) the first life evolved, in the Archaean era. Some bacteria developed photosynthesis, which lets plants make food from the Sun's light and water. This released a lot of oxygen, which was first taken up by iron in solution. Eventually, free oxygen got into the atmosphere or air, making the Earth's surface suitable for aerobic life (see Great Oxygenation Event). This oxygen also formed the ozone layer which protects the Earth from bad ultraviolet radiation from the Sun. Complex life on the surface of the land did not exist before the ozone layer.
The Earth was very different in the distant past. Long ago, almost all land was in one place. This is called a supercontinent. The earliest known supercontinent was called Vaalbara. Much later, there was a time (the Cryogenian) when the Earth was almost entirely covered by thick ice sheets (glaciers). This is called the Snowball Earth theory.
What it is made of.
The Earth is rocky. It is the largest of the rocky planets moving around the Sun by mass and by size. It is still much, much smaller than the gas planets such as Jupiter, though.
Chemical make-up.
Over all, the Earth is made of iron (32.1%), oxygen (30.1%), silicon (15.1%), magnesium (13.9%), sulfur (2.9%), nickel (1.8%), calcium (1.5%), and aluminium (1.4%). The 1.2% left over is made of many different kinds of other chemicals. Chemicals that are very uncommon (such as gold and platinum) can be very valuable.
The structure of the Earth changes from the inside to the outside. The center of the earth (the Earth's core) is mostly iron (88.8%), nickel (5.8%), sulfur (4.5%), and less than 1% other things. The Earth's crust is largely oxygen (47%). Oxygen is normally a gas but it can join with other chemicals to make compounds like water and rocks. 99.22% of rocks have oxygen in them. The most common oxygen-having rocks are silica (made with silicon), alumina (made with aluminum), rust (made with iron), lime (made with calcium), magnesia (made with magnesium), potash (made with potassium), and sodium oxide, and there are others as well.
Shape.
The Earth's shape is a ball that is a little squashed on the top and bottom: an oblate spheroid. This is because the Earth turns around itself very quickly, pushing the middle out a little and pulling the top and bottom in a little. The equator, the line around the middle of the Earth, is about 40,075 km long and, generally, the Earth is about 12,742 km wide (though, again, that changes a little when you go from the top or bottom to the middle). The highest mountain above sea level—the well-known Mount Everest (which is 8.8 km above sea level)—is "not" actually the one that is the farthest away from the center of the Earth. Instead, the sleeping volcano Mount Chimborazo in Ecuador is: it is only 6.3 km above sea level but it is almost at the equator. Because of this, Mount Chimborazo is 6,384.4 km from the center of the Earth, while Mount Everest is 2.1 km closer to it. Similarly, the lowest point below sea level that we are conscious of is the Challenger Deep in the Mariana Trench in the Pacific Ocean. It is about 10.9 km below sea level, but, again, there are probably places at the bottom of the Arctic Ocean that are nearer to the center of the Earth.
What it is like inside.
The deepest hole ever dug is only about 12.3 km. We know something about the inside of the Earth, though, because we can learn things from earthquakes and the times when volcanoes erupt. We are able to see how quickly the shock waves move through the Earth in different places.
The inside of the Earth is very different from the outside. Almost all of Earth's liquid water is in the seas or close to the surface. The surface also has a lot of oxygen, which comes from plants. Small and simple kinds of life can live far under the earth, but animals and plants only live on the surface or in the seas. The rocks on the surface of the Earth (the Earth's crust) are well known. They are thicker where there is land, between 30 to thick. Under the seas they are sometimes only 6 km thick. There are three groups of rocks that make up most of the Earth's crust. Some rock is made when the hot liquid rock comes from inside the earth (igneous rocks); another type of rock is made when sediment is laid down, usually under the sea (sedimentary rocks); and a third kind of rock is made when the other two are changed by very high temperature or pressure (metamorphic rocks). A very few rocks also fall out of the sky (meteorites).
Below the crust is warm and almost-liquid rock that is always moving around (the Earth's mantle). Then, there is a thin liquid layer of heated rock (the outer core). This is very hot: 7000 °C. The middle of the inside of the Earth would be liquid as well but all the weight of the rock above it pushes it back into being solid. This solid middle part (the inner core) is almost all iron. This is what makes the Earth magnetic.
Pieces moving around.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : Plate tectonics
The Earth's crust is solid but made of parts which move very slowly. The thin level of hard rock on the outside of the Earth rests on hot liquid material below it in the deeper mantle. This liquid material moves because it gets heat from the hot center of the earth. The slow movement of the plates is what causes earthquakes, volcanoes and large groups of mountains on the Earth.
There are three ways plates can come together. Two plates can move towards each other ("convergent" plate edges). This can form islands (such as Japan), burning mountains, and high mountain ranges (such as the Andes and Himalayas). Two plates can move away from each other ("divergent" plate edges). This gives the warm liquid rock inside the earth a place to come out. This makes special mountain ranges below the sea or large low lands like Africa's Great Rift Valley. Plates are able to move beside each other as well ("transform" plate edges, such as the San Andreas Fault). This makes their edges crush against each other and makes many shocks as they move.
Surface.
The outside of the Earth is not even. There are high places called mountains, and high flat places called plateaus. There are low places called valleys and canyons. For the most part, moving air and water from the sky and seas damages rocks in high places and breaks them into small pieces. The air and water then move these pieces to lower places. Plains are important for growing food and building towns. Many people live in China and India, for example. Because of this, the Earth would have all been very flat a long time before now, but the moving plates discussed above make most of these differences.
All places on Earth are made of or are on top of rocks. The different kinds of these rocks was discussed above. The outside of the Earth is usually not uncovered rock, though. Over 70% of the Earth is covered by seas full of salty water. (This salty water makes up about 97½% of all Earth's water. The fresh water persons can drink is mostly ice. Only a very small amount is at hand in rivers and under the earth for men and women to drink and use.) The air above the Earth stops the water from going away into outer space. As well, there have been so many living things for such a long time that much of the land on Earth is covered with plants or with what is left from earlier living things. Places with very little rain are dry wastes named deserts; these normally have very few living things but life is able to grow very quickly when these wastes have an uncommon rainfall. Places with large amounts of rain are almost always large woods; these sometimes have so many trees that their leaves stop all the Sun's light from being able to get to the earth at all. Lately, persons have also changed the outside of the Earth a great amount (see below).
Air.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : Atmosphere
All around the Earth is a large amount of air (the atmosphere). The mass of the Earth pulls the gasses in the air down and does not let them go into outer space. The air is mostly made of nitrogen (about 78%) and oxygen (about 21%) but there are a few other gasses as well. Most living things need the air (or parts of the air gripped in the water) to breathe and live. They use the gasses—especially oxygen and carbon dioxide—to make and use sugar and to give themselves power.
The air animals and plants use to live is only the first level of the air around the Earth (the troposphere). The day to day changes in this level of air are named weather; the changes between places far away from each other and from year to year are named the climate. Rain and storms are both in this level. Both come about because this part of the air gets colder as it goes up. Cold air becomes thicker and falls, and warm air becomes thinner and goes up. The turning Earth moves the air as well and air moves north and south because the middle of the Earth generally gets more power from the Sun and is warmer than the north and south points. At the same time, air over water (specially very warm water) gets water in it but, because cold air is not able to take in as much water, it starts to make clouds and rain as it gets colder. The way water moves around in a circle like this is called the water cycle.
Above this first level, there are four other levels. The air gets colder as it goes up in the first level; in the second level (the stratosphere), the air gets warmer as it goes up. This level has a special kind of oxygen called ozone. The ozone in this air keeps living things safe from damaging rays from the Sun. The power from these rays is what makes this level warmer and warmer. The middle level (the mesosphere) gets colder and colder with height; the fourth level (the thermosphere) gets warmer and warmer; and the last level (the exosphere) is almost outer space and has very little air at all. It reaches about half the way to the Moon. The three outer levels have a lot of electric power moving through them; this is called the ionosphere and is important for radio and other electric waves in the air. It is also where the Northern Lights are.
Even though air seems very light, the weight of all of the air above the outside of the Earth (air pressure) is important. Generally, from sea level to the top of the outer level of the air, a space of air one square centimeter across has a mass of about 1.03 kg and a space of air one square inch across has a weight of about 14.7 pounds. The mass of the air also keeps the Earth safe when rocks (meteorites) hit it from outer space. Without the air, the damage meteorites do would be much geater. Because of the air, meteorites generally burn up long before they get to the earth.
The air also keeps the Earth warm, specially the half turned away from the Sun. Some gasses – especially methane and carbon dioxide – work like a blanket to keep things warm. In the past, the Earth has been much warmer and much colder than it is now. Since people have grown used to the heat we have now, though, we do not want the Earth to be too much warmer or colder. Most of the ways people create electric power use burning kinds of carbon—especially coal, oil, and natural gas. Burning these creates new carbon dioxide and can cause more warming. A large discussion is going on now about what people should do about the Earth's latest warming, which has gone on for about 150 years. So far, this warming has been good for people: plants have grown better and the weather has been better than when it was colder before. Some people who learn about science, though, say that many bad things will possibly come about if the warming goes on.
People.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : Human
About seven billion people live on Earth. They live in about 200 different lands called countries. Some (like Russia) are large with many large cities. Others (like the Vatican) are small. The five countries with the most people are China, India, the United States, Indonesia, and Brazil. About 90% of people live in the north half of the world, which has most of the land. Scientists think that people originally came from Africa. Now, 70% of all people do not live in Africa but in Europe and Asia.
People change the Earth in many ways. They have been able to grow plants for food and clothes for about ten thousand years. When there was enough food, they were able to build towns and cities. Near these places, men and women were able to change rivers, bring water to farms, and stop floods (rising water) from coming over their land. People found useful animals and bred them so they were easier to keep.
Other websites.
<indicator name="top-icon"></indicator>

</doc>
<doc id="221" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=221" title="Et cetera">
Et cetera

Et cetera means "and the rest" in Latin. It is often used in English to continue a list that is longer than what can be normally written. People most often write "et cetera" as etc.. Very rarely, it is also written "&c" because the ampersand, or the "&", is the same as "et". It is also the symbol for "and". Some people write it as "ect", but that is wrong.
 "This can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".</div >

</doc>
<doc id="224" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=224" title="Experiment">
Experiment

An experiment is a test of an idea or a method. It is often used by scientists and engineers. An experiment is used to see how well the idea matches the real world. Experiments have been used for many years to help people understand the world around them.
Experiments can tell us if a theory is false, or if something does not work. They cannot tell us if a theory is true. When Einstein said that gravity could affect light, it took a few years before astronomers could test it. General relativity predicts that the path of light is bent in a gravitational field; light passing a massive body is deflected towards that body. This effect has been confirmed by observing the light of stars or distant quasars being deflected as it passes the Sun.
Now, a hundred years or so after Einstein published his ideas, there have been many tests, all of which have been consistent with Einstein's predictions. But, one day, we might find the theory has some limits beyond which it does not work. Logically speaking, what we test are implications of the theory, because the theory itself is too large and complicated to test all at once.
References.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="226" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=226" title="Ethics">
Ethics

Ethics is the part of philosophy that deals with good and evil. Ethics tries to answer questions like:
Ideas about ethics.
Some philosophers call ethics the "science of morality".
"Morality" is what someone thinks or feels is good or bad.
There are many different moralities, but they share some things.
For example most people think that murder (killing somebody) is wrong.(compare Exodus 20:13)
Some philosophers have hope to find more things that moralities share.
They think that ethics should use the scientific method to study 
things that people think are good or bad. Their work can be used
to test the fairness of a situation, such as how people should treat
each other. An example of this kind of thinking is the categorical imperative.
Many countries have laws based on this idea of fairness.
Other philosophers think that ethics is separate from morality.
They do not think that ethics can be studied using the scientific method 
and they think it is closer to metaphysics. Some of them think like 
platonists about what is good and bad.
Some philosophers believe that ethics is subjective.
This means that they think that what is right for me is whatever I say is right.
These philosophers do not think that ethics is the same for all people.
What is ethics used for?
Understanding ethics can help people decide what to do when they have choices. Many philosophers think that doing anything or making any choice is a part of ethics.
Ethics is part of other fields of study in many ways. Here are some ways:
Along with aesthetics ethics forms part of axiology the philosophy of what people like.

</doc>
<doc id="227" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=227" title="E Prime">
E Prime

E Prime (it means English Prime) is a way of speaking English without using the verb "to be" in any way ("be, is, am, are, was, were, been, and being"). Instead, an E Prime speaker or writer uses different verbs like "to become," "to remain," and "to equal" or they might choose to rearrange the sentence to show that the "thing" does not actually "act". For example, in E Prime, a writer would change the statement "Mistakes were made" to "Joe made mistakes." This change in wording reveals an actor (Joe) where the previous form concealed the actor. Users of E Prime would consider the changed sentence more accurate.
What E Prime is.
D. David Bourland, Jr. first suggested E Prime in 1965. Bourland had studied the discipline (way of thinking) of General Semantics. The main idea of General Semantics is that people can only know what they observe and experience when they see, hear, touch, taste, smell, think, and feel, and furthermore, that what they observe and experience can affect how they observe and experience in the future. Because each person has different experiences throughout their lives, they interpret their experiences differently. 
Students of General Semantics and users of E Prime contend that to say "This cat is soft" leaves out many other attributes, and implies that the outside "object" of the cat is the "same as" the inside experience of "softness". Instead, E Prime users say "This cat feels soft TO ME" to remind themselves of the following:
What E Prime is not.
Although languages like Russian, Arabic, Turkish, and Cantonese do not always use a separate verb for "to be," they do have the idea of "being." For example, an English speaker might say "This apple is red." An Arabic speaker might say "This apple red." Most languages can be used to express the idea of a red apple. An E Prime user chooses to only say that "This apple looks red to me" to remind themselves that "seeing red" involves both the apple and the eye and brain of the person looking at the apple.
Many teachers of English encourage students to use verbs other than "to be." To them, using more active verbs makes writing clearer and more interesting. These teachers want to improve their students' writing and may not agree with the ideas of General Semantics or E Prime.
Different functions of 'to be'.
In English, 'to be' can have different functions:

</doc>
<doc id="230" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=230" title="Einstein on the Beach">
Einstein on the Beach

Einstein on the Beach is an opera written by the minimalist composer Philip Glass and theater director and designer Robert Wilson. It was first acted for an audience in Avignon, France in 1976. 
It is a single act opera, about five hours long with no intermission. Because of the length and the minimalist (repetitive) nature of the music, audience members are free to enter and leave the opera as they wish. Glass's music tends to cycle round, but does not exactly repeat itself. Admittedly, he has described himself as a composer of "music with repetitive structures". Though his earlier music fits what is normally called "minimalist", he has since evolved stylistically.
References.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="231" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=231" title="English">
English

The word English can mean:
 
 

</doc>
<doc id="234" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=234" title="Ethnic group">
Ethnic group

An ethnic group is a group of people who are considered to be the same in some or multiple ways. They may all have the same ancestors, speak the same language, or have the same religion. They often live in the same or surrounding area. 
Sometimes almost all of the people in one country are of the same ethnic group, but not always. Often one country may have several different ethnic groups, or the people of one ethnic group may live in several different countries.
The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights ensures the rights of ethnic groups in Article 27 and also gives them the right to use their own language.
 "This can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".</div >

</doc>
<doc id="236" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=236" title="Ewe">
Ewe

Ewe might mean:
 
 

</doc>
<doc id="242" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=242" title="Ebola virus">
Ebola virus

Ebola virus is a very dangerous virus. It causes a "hemorrhagic fever" called Ebola virus disease. "Hemorrhagic" means that the victim will bleed a lot, inside and outside their body. Out of every 10 people who get Ebola, on average five to nine die. There are four kinds of Ebola virus that can cause the disease. The virus was first found in Sudan. It is found in Africa, with very few cases in Europe and the United States.
Transmission.
The Ebola virus that makes people sick lives in the blood and other liquids and wet things in some kinds of non-human animals without killing them. Scientists think the animals it lives in are mainly some kinds of monkeys or fruit bats. When people touch animals that have the virus, or wet things that came out of those animals, they can get sick. 
Ebola cannot be caught through the air, or by being near sick people. The virus can only go from liquids into people's bodies. This means Ebola can be caught by touching a sick person's blood, saliva, mucus, semen, diarrhea, vomit, or other fluids that come out of a sick person's body.
If a person does not die from the disease, he can still give other people the infection by having sex for nearly another two months after they stop being sick. This is because the virus can still be in the man's semen after a long time.
Symptoms.
When people get Ebola the first symptoms look like some other diseases. People get a fever and feel very tired. Their head, stomach, joints, and throat might hurt. Sometimes, people think they have other diseases like malaria or typhoid fever.
Later, people get much sicker. They bleed both inside and outside their bodies. They have blood in their diarrhea and vomit. They bleed from their noses, mouths, and genitals/sex organs. They get shock: low blood pressure, fast pulse (heart rate), and low blood circulation to the body. Their organs might stop working. Ebola also causes stiffness throughout the body which makes it hard for sick people to move. 
Five to nine out of every ten people who get sick with Ebola die.
Treatment.
There is no cure for Ebola, but if people get care quickly from doctors and nurses at a hospital, more of them live. People with Ebola need a lot of fluids to replace fluids lost from diarrhea, vomiting, and bleeding. The most important care is giving them water with a very small amount of salt and sugar in it. This is called oral rehydration. It helps to replace their fluids and blood. It is also important to give medicines in case they get bad blood pressure and blood circulation.
Prevention.
Scientists have not yet found a vaccine for Ebola, but efforts are underway.
Research.
World Community Grid is a computing project that is seeking possible drug treatments. People donate the spare time on their computers to the project.

</doc>
<doc id="243" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=243" title="Ecology">
Ecology

Template codice_1 has been incorrectly substituted.
Ecology is the science which studies the biota and the environment, and their interactions. It comes from the Greek "oikos" = house; "logos" = study. Ecology is the study of ecosystems. Ecosystems describe the web or network of relations among organisms at different scales of organization. Since ecology refers to any form of biodiversity, ecologists research everything from tiny bacteria in nutrient recycling to the effects of tropical rain forests on the Earth's atmosphere. Scientists who study these interactions are called "ecologists". 
Terrestrial ecoregion and climate change research are two areas where ecologists (people studying ecology) now focus.
There are many practical applications of ecology in conservation biology, wetland management, natural resource management (agriculture, forestry, fisheries), city planning (urban ecology), community health, economics, and applied science. It provides a framework for understanding and researching human social interaction.
Ecology in politics.
Ecology starts many powerful philosophical and political movements - including the conservation movement, wellness movement, environmental movement, and ecology movement we know today. When these are combined with peace movements and the Six Principles, they are called green movements. In general, these put ecosystem health first on a list of human moral and political priorities, as the way to achieve better human health and social harmony, and better economics. 
People with these beliefs are called political ecologists. Some have organized into the Green Parties, but there are actually political ecologists in most political parties. They very often use arguments from ecology to advance policy, especially forest policy and energy policy.
Also, ecology means that it is the branch of biology dealing with the relations and interactions between organisms and their environment, including other organisms.
Ecology includes economics.
Many ecologists also deal with human economics:
Ecological economics and human development theory try to separate the economic questions from others, but it is difficult. Many people think economics is just part of ecology now, and that economics that ignores it is wrong. "Natural capital" is an example of one theory combining both.
Ecology mirrors anthropology.
Sometimes ecology is compared to anthropology, because both use a lot of methods to study one thing we cannot live without. Anthropology is about how our bodies and minds are affected by our environment, while ecology is about how our environment is affected by our bodies and minds. There is even a type of anthropology called ecological anthropology, which studies how people interact with the environment. 
Antoine de Saint-Exupery stated: "The earth teaches us more about ourselves than all the books. Because it resists us. Man discovers himself when he measures himself against the obstacle."
References.
If dogs are real do we eat them

</doc>
<doc id="246" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=246" title="Economics">
Economics

Economics is the social science which studies economic activity: how people make choices to get what they want. It has been defined as "the study of scarcity and choice" and is basically about individual choice. It also studies what affects the production, distribution and consumption of goods and services in an economy.
Investment and income relate to economics. The word comes from Ancient Greek, and relates to οἶκος oíkos "house" and νόμος nomos "custom" or "law". The models used in economics today were mostly started in the 19th century. People took ideas from the field of political economy because they wanted to use an empirical approach similar to the one used in the natural sciences.
Subjects and objects in economics.
The subjects in economic study are households, business companies, the government (the state), and foreign countries. Households offer their "factors of production" to companies. This includes work, land, capital (machines, buildings) and information. They get income which they use to buy or 'consume' goods. 
Business companies produce and sell goods and buy factors of production from households and from other companies. 
The state or public sector includes institutions and organisations. The state takes some of the earnings from the business companies and households, and uses it to pay for "public goods" like streets or education, to be available for everyone. The last subject is foreign countries. This includes all households, business companies and state institutions, which are not based in one's own country. They demand and supply goods from abroad.
The objects in economic study are consumer goods, capital goods, and factors of production. Consumer goods are classified as "usage goods" (for example, gasoline or toilet paper), as "purpose goods" (for example, a house or bicycle), and as "services" (for example, the work of a doctor or cleaning lady). Capital goods are goods which are necessary for producing other goods. Examples of these are buildings, equipment, and machines. Factors of production are work, ground, capital, information, and environment.
History.
Economists are strongly influenced by the times they live in. For example, Karl Marx lived in a time where workers' conditions were very poor, and John Maynard Keynes lived through the Great Depression of the 1930s. Today's economists can look back and understand why they made their judgements, and try to make better ones.
Branches of economics.
The two main branches of economics are microeconomics and macroeconomics. 
Macroeconomics is about the economy in general. For example, if a country's wealth goes up or if millions of people become unemployed, those are things that macroeconomists study. Microeconomics is about smaller and more specific things such as how families and households spend their money.
There are a number of other branches of economics:
Famous economists.
Famous economists in history include:
Famous economists of the 19th and 20th century include Léon Walras, Carl Menger, N. Gregory Mankiw and Friedrich August von Hayek.

</doc>
<doc id="247" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=247" title="Chemical element">
Chemical element

A chemical element is a substance that contains only one type of atom. An element is the smallest amount of a substance that can still keep its properties. If a substance contains more than one type of atom, it is a compound. An element can be a solid, liquid or gas. The smallest particle of such an element is an atom. Atoms are made up of protons, neutrons, and electrons. 
Each element contains only one kind of atom. The number of protons in an atom controls the atom's properties. This number is called the atomic number. For example, all atoms with 6 protons are of the chemical element carbon, and all atoms with 92 protons are of the element uranium. 
Elements are the basic building blocks for all types of substances. When they are combined with each other, they can form molecules. 
118 different chemical elements are known to modern chemistry. 92 of these elements can be found in nature, and the others can only be made in laboratories. The human body is made up of 26 elements. The last natural element discovered was uranium, in 1789. The first man-made element was Technetium, in 1937. 
Chemical elements are commonly arranged in the periodic table. Where the elements are on the table tells us about their properties relative to the other elements. 
Chemical symbols.
Chemical elements are also given a unique "chemical symbol". Chemical symbols are used all over the world. This means that, no matter which language is spoken, there is no confusion about what the symbol means. Chemical symbols of elements come from their English or Latin names. For example, carbon has the chemical symbol 'C', and sodium has chemical symbol 'Na', after the Latin "natrium". Tungsten is called 'W' after its German name, "wolfram". 'Au' is the symbol for gold and it comes from the Latin word for gold, "aurum". Another symbol which comes from Latin is 'Ag'. This is the element silver and it comes from the Latin "argentum". Lead's symbol, 'Pb', comes from the Latin "plumbum" and the English word plumber derives from this as pipes used to be made out of lead. Others were named after famous people, like einsteinium, which was named after Albert Einstein.
Compounds.
Elements can join (react) to form pure compounds (such as water, salts, oxides, and organic compounds). In many cases, these compounds have a fixed composition and their own structure and properties. The properties of the compound may be very different from the elements it is made from. Sodium is a metal that burns when put into water and chlorine is a poisonous gas. When they react together they make "sodium chloride" (salt) which is harmless and edible.
Mixtures.
Some elements, particularly metal elements mix together in any proportion to form new structures. Such new structures are not compounds. They are called mixtures.
Isotopes.
Most elements in nature consist of atoms with different numbers of neutrons. An isotope is a form of an element with a certain number of neutrons. For example, carbon has two stable, naturally occurring isotopes: carbon-12 (6 neutrons) and carbon-13 (7 neutrons). Carbon-14 (8 neutrons) is a naturally occurring radioactive isotope of carbon. Of each element, except for Ununoctium, at least two isotopes are known.
Classification.
Elements can be classified based on physical states. At room temperature and pressure, most elements are solids, only 11 are gases and 2 are liquids.
Elements can also be classified into metals and non-metals. There are many more metals than non-metals. 
However, a few elements have properties in between those of metals and non-metals. These elements are called semimetals (or metalloids).

</doc>
<doc id="248" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=248" title="Egypt">
Egypt

For the ancient civilization, see Ancient Egypt.
Egypt is a country in northeast Africa. Its capital city is Cairo. Egypt is famous for its very old monuments, such as the Pyramids and the Sphinx.
History.
Egypt has been an independent country since 1922. It is a member of the United Nations and the Arab League. It was a republic from 1952 after the revolution of 1952 by the leader Gamal Abdel Nasser.
Geography.
Egypt, is a large country, but a large portion of it is desert. Most people live in areas around the coast of the Mediterranean Sea and along the Nile River. This includes the cities of Cairo, Alexandria, Aswan, and Port Said. Not many people live in the desert. Today, Egypt has about 85 million people.
Egypt is divided into 29 areas, called Governorates of Egypt.
Politics.
The Egyptian Parliament sits in Cairo and makes laws for the whole country. The country is currently run by the interim president Adly Mansour who was placed as an interim president for the current transition period of Egypt.
and Abd El-Fatah El-Sisi becomes the new president after last elections that happened at May 2014. In June 2012 Mohamed Morsi became Egypt's first democratically elected president. He was sentenced to death in May 2015.
Revolution.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : 2011 Egyptian revolution
In January 2011, thousands of protesters gathered in Cairo. They wanted Hosni Mubarak to leave office. He had been the President for almost 30 years. On February 11, 2011, Vice President Omar Suleiman made an announcement. He said that Mubarak agreed to leave office. Suleiman also said that Mubarak directed the Supreme Council of the armed forces would run the country.
Demographics.
Religion.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : Islam in Egypt
Today, the people of Egypt are mostly Sunni Muslims. There are still many Christians in Egypt today. Many of these belong to the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria.
Languages.
The official language in Egypt is Arabic. A high percentage of the population, however, speaks English. French and German are also taught in Egypt as second language.
Money.
Egypt is classified to 3 classes Poor , Middle Class & The Rich People Class. Middle Class is the most common and the highest in the population in Egypt.
Famous people.
Many famous people are from Egypt. Some of these include Omar Sharif, who was an international actor, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, who was the first person from Africa to lead the United Nations, and four Nobel Prize winners: Anwar Sadat, who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1978, Naguib Mahfouz, who won the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1988, Ahmed Zewail, who won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1999, and Mohamed ElBaradei, who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 2005. Egypt's climate is good in winter and very hot in summer, depending on the time.
Governorates.
Egypt is divided into 27 governorates. The governorates are divided into regions. The regions have towns and villages. Each governorate has a capital. Sometimes capital has the same name as the governorate.
Culture.
Egypt is a country with an immense cultural mix. Mostly, you'll find traditions that remain from the time of Pharaohs. The advantages that you'll find when you compare areas of Egypt with other Middle Eastern countries is what makes Egypt seem more advanced than others.
Egyptians form a society of a mixture standards and different religious rules whether it's Islam or Christianity. Each member of the families is responsible for the integrity, respect and for the behavior of other family members. Family members are quite close to each other in almost every situation creating a safer environment than in the West.
Tourism.
Tourism is one of the most important national incomes in Egypt. In 2008, about 12 million tourists visited Egypt providing nearly $12 billion of national income to Egypt. Tourism is very related to the economy of the country as a whole.
Giza Necropolis is one of Egypt's iconic sites. It's a very popular destination for tourists to visit. It's very popularized for its containment of the Great Pyramid of Giza which is considered one of the Seven Wonders of the World.
Many tourists love to visit Egypt for its historical, cultural, religious and entertainment experience of tourism.
Transport.
There are many transport ways in Egypt along the Nile.
Metro.
Cairo Metro is one of the most important projects in Egypt. It consists of 3 lines. Metro is the most preferable transport in Egypt due to persistent major traffic jams in the streets of Cairo.
A Metro line 4 is right now being developed and expected to be active in future reaching New Cairo District.
Air Transport.
Egypt is a country that really care about Air Transport. It established EgyptAir in 1932. The airline is based on Cairo International Airport and owned by the government.
Other websites.
 "This about a  can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="249" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=249" title="Everything2">
Everything2

Everything2 or E2 is a website. It lets people make pages about many different things, and some people use it as a diary.
E2 users create pages called "nodes" and add stuff in "writeups". Only logged-in users can create writeups. Only the person who created the writeup or someone who the website owners (called "gods") choose can edit the writeup. On the other hand, on Wikipedia, anyone can edit pages, but on Everything2 only those who can edit the writeup can edit pages.
Everything2 does not require a like Wikipedia does. So, it is possible to have more than one article (writeups) under the same title (node), each by different authors, and presenting different points of view.
Other websites.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="253" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=253" title="Editor">
Editor

An editor is a person who makes changes to documents.
The word "editor" can also mean:
 
 

</doc>
<doc id="255" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=255" title="Ecological yield">
Ecological yield

Ecological yield is the harvestable growth of an ecosystem. It is most commonly measured in forestry - in fact sustainable forestry is defined as that which does not harvest more wood in a year than has grown in that year, within a given patch of forest.
However, the concept is also applicable to water, and soil, and any other aspect of an ecosystem which can be both harvested and renewed - the so-called renewable resources. The carrying capacity of an ecosystem is reduced over time if more than the amount which is "renewed" (refreshed or regrown or rebuilt).

</doc>
<doc id="256" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=256" title="Experience economy">
Experience economy

The experience economy is the intangible service economy that customers experience directly. In moral purchasing, Natural Capitalism and other theories of how consumers make choices, they are actually choosing experiences or comprehensive outcomes of their choices. For instance to buy local is to choose a whole experience of local suppliers, such as in a farmers market or Slow Food, that is quite different than the experience associated with factory food or fast food.
 "This can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".</div >

</doc>
<doc id="257" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=257" title="Execution">
Execution

Execution is where state authorities kill someone for having committed an extremely serious crime, usually treason or especially terrible murders. In most countries where the death penalty is still provided for by law, using it is an option available to the sentencing judge: even if the jury or judicial panel recommends the death penalty, the presiding judge still has the option to lock the convicted person in a prison for the rest of their life.
Beheading.
Beheading means cutting the convict's head off. It is one of the oldest execution methods and already mentioned in the Bible. Beheading used to be the standard method of execution in Scandinavia and Germany. Commoners were usually beheaded with an axe and noblemen with a sword. A special device, like guillotine, can also be used, as in France. Nazi Germany used guillotine to execute criminal convicts, such as murderers.
Centuries ago many countries used beheading as an execution for important people, including England. In England, many noblemen and even some kings and queens have been beheaded. There, the prisoner would be led up the scaffold and usually say a speech. Then, he/she would be blindfolded and put his/her neck onto a block. Then, the executioner would lift up his axe and swing it down onto the victim's neck. If the executioner was skilled and the axe was sharp, then the axe would usually cut through the bone and organs of the victim in one stroke. But if the executioner was inexperienced, then it may take many strokes before the head would be cut off.
Other ways of execution.
Many countries do not allow executions as punishment any more, because it is too violent. However, many states of the United States and some other foreign countries allow it. Even in the United States, less violent ways of execution have had to be used. Here are some other ways of execution other than hanging

</doc>
<doc id="258" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=258" title="Flesch Reading Ease">
Flesch Reading Ease

The Flesch Reading Ease measures textual difficulty, which indicates how easy a text is to read.
Tools to calculate the Flesch Reading Ease include:
How it works.
The Flesch Reading Ease Scale measures readability as follows: 
100: Very easy to read. Average sentence length is 12 words or fewer. No words of more than two syllables. 
65: Plain English. Average sentence is 15 to 20 words long. Average word has two syllables. 
30: A little hard to read. Sentences will have mostly 25 words. Two syllables usually.
0: Very hard to read. Average sentence is 37 words long. Average word has more than two syllables. 
The higher the rating, the easier the text is to understand. By the very nature of technical subject matter, the Flesch score is
usually relatively low for technical documentation. If the Flesch test is used regularly, one may develop a sense of what a
reasonable score is for the type of documentation one is working on and aim to align with this score. The approach to calculating
the Flesch score is as follows: 
The Flesch score for this subsection is 61.

</doc>
<doc id="262" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=262" title="February">
February

February is the second month of the year, coming between January and March, with 28 days in most years. In leap years February has 29 days. In Sweden in 1732 the month had 30 days. This was to make the calendar match the rest of the world. In 1930 and 1931, February had 30 days in the Soviet Union because the government changed all the months to be 30 days long. The name comes either from the Roman god Februus or else from "februa", the festivals of purification celebrated in Rome every fifteenth of this month.
The Month.
February is one of the last two months to be added to the calendar at the beginning of the year (the other is January). This is because in the original Roman calendar, the two months of winter, when not much would happen in agriculture, did not have names.
February is the second month of the year, coming between January and March, and is also the shortest month, with 28 days in a common year, and 29 days in a leap year. February begins on the same day of the week as March and November in common years, and on the same day as August in a leap year. Every year, February ends on the same day of the week as October, and in common years, February also ends on the same day of the week as January. In a leap year, February is the only month to begin and end on the same day of the week.
From circa 700 BC, when Numa Pompilius, the second king of Rome, added it to the calendar, February had 23 days and 24 days on some of every second year, until 46 BC when Julius Caesar assigned it 29 days on every fourth year and 28 days otherwise. Leap year Day, February 29, is added in every year that can be divided equally by four, such as 2012 and 2016, but this does not apply when the year ending in "00" at the turn of the century does not divide equally into 400. This means that 2000 was a leap year in the Gregorian calendar, but 1900 was not. This is where the Julian calendar calculated dates differently, as it always repeated February 29 every four years.
February is a winter month in the Northern Hemisphere and a summer month in the Southern Hemisphere. In each hemisphere, it is the seasonal equivalent of August in the other. In weather lore, Groundhog Day, in the United States, is set to decide what the weather will be like for the rest of the winter.
February's flower is the violet and its birthstone is the amethyst. The meaning of the amethyst is sincerity. The zodiac signs for February are Aquarius (January 21 to February 19), and Pisces (February 20 to March 20).

</doc>
<doc id="269" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=269" title="FAQ">
FAQ

FAQ is an abbreviation for "Frequently Asked Question(s)". The term is used for a list questions and answers. All of the questions are supposed to be asked often and they all are about the same thing. Since the acronym was first used in written form, there are different ways it is said; both "fak" and "F.A.Q." are commonly used. 
 "This can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".</div >

</doc>
<doc id="271" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=271" title="Flame (disambiguation)">
Flame (disambiguation)

A flame is the part of a fire that can be seen. Flame might also mean:
Other.
 
 

</doc>
<doc id="276" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=276" title="Financial capital">
Financial capital

Financial capital is a form of capital. It is things that have value, but do not do anything by themselves. They are only valuable because people value (want) them. For example, money is a form of financial capital. You cannot do anything with money but it still has value.
Financial capital is used to pay for things, this is because there is always more of it and people always want it. This means that financial capital has a stable value and can be traded in most places and with most people.
Some forms of financial capital, such as stocks, gold or bonds are not wanted by everybody. However they can be traded with people for money or another type of financial capital. Because of this, these forms of financial capital do not have a stable price. This means that some people try to make a profit by buying and selling these types of financial capital in a market.
Some things are treated as financial capital, even though they do have a use. For example, some people buy and sell land but are not interested in doing anything with it. Some people think this sort of trade is bad because the land should be used and not just treated like money. Other types of capital, such as social capital and human capital are rarely treated like financial capital. This may be because they involve people. Treating useful capital like financial capital is called comodification.
In politics, a common question is how often the government should use financial capital. In particular, should the government use financial capital to make a profit? Traditionally, liberal politicians do not mind this kind of trading for profit, but socialist or conservative politicians are against it.

</doc>
<doc id="278" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=278" title="Fecund universes">
Fecund universes

Fecund universes is a multiverse theory of Lee Smolin. It relies on models of our universe and statistics from astrophysics but is more correctly a theory of cosmology.
In this theory, collapsing stars, or black holes, are always creating new universes with slightly different laws of physics. Because these laws are only slightly different, each is assumed to be like a mutation of the original universe, as if each universe was a kind of single-celled organism. It would reproduce by "splitting" in some sense.
This theory relies on many models of our universe to model these "mutated" alternative universes, the ones that Smolin supposes are generated or "spun off" by black holes. 
No human can ever be part of any of these "other" universes. Observations from astrophysics can only say if the black holes exist or are common, and give some idea of how much the laws of physics can vary and still let the new universes produce new black holes. 
Smolin predicts that there would be many black holes in the universe humans can see, since they are likely in a very late born universe, by simple probability. If there are many black holes, that is evidence for his theory, 
As this shows, cosmology has a very different standard of evidence and burden of proof than is required for models of our universe only, which humans (using mathematics) can observe and exchange knowledge on.
It is hard to separate science from religion on such questions. It may be a simple matter of preference whether one wants to see one's universe as part of a system like biology or like mechanics - clockwork. Smolin's theory is important mostly because it challenges the mechanistic paradigm. 
Even if it is wrong, it raises the idea that living beings might have to see their universe as also living to be able to understand or care about it at all. Some compare Smolin's theory to Gaia philosophy which combines biology, geology and ecology to explain the Earth, our planet, as a living thing. If both are right, humans are on a living planet in a living universe. This idea is very appealing - which does not mean it is really "right". Some think both are a kind of religion.

</doc>
<doc id="280" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=280" title="Food">
Food

Template codice_1 has been incorrectly substituted.
Food is what people eat. Food usually comes from animals or plants. It is eaten by living things to provide energy and nutrition. Food contains the nutrition that people and animals need to be healthy. It contains protein, fat, carbohydrates, vitamins, and minerals. Liquids used for energy and nutrition are often called "drinks".
Food for humans is mostly made through farming or gardening. It includes animal and vegetable sources. Some people refuse to eat food from animal origin, like meat, eggs, and products with milk in them. Not eating meat is called vegetarianism. Not eating or using any animal products is called veganism. 
Food produced by farmers or gardeners can be changed by industrial processes (the food industry). Processed food usually contains several natural ingredients and food additives (such as preservatives, antioxidants, emulsifiers, flavour enhancers, etc.).
At home, food is prepared in the kitchen, by the cook. The cook sometimes uses a cookbook. Examples of cooking utensils are pressure cookers, pots, and frying pans.
Food can also be prepared and served in restaurants or refectory (in particular for kids in school).
The utensils used may be a plate, knife, fork, chopsticks, spoon, bowl, or spork.
Many people do not grow their own food. They have to buy food that was grown by someone else. People buy most of their food in shops or markets. But some people still grow most or all of their own food.
People may buy food and take it home to cook it. They may buy food that is ready to eat from a street vendor or a restaurant.
Food-related issues.
Food shortage is still a big problem in the world today. Many people do not have enough money to buy the food that they need. Bad weather or other problems sometimes destroy the growing food in one part of the world. When people do not have enough food, we say that they are hungry. If they do not eat enough food for a long time, they will become sick and die from starvation. In areas where many people do not have enough food, we say that there is famine there. 
Food and water can make people sick if it is contaminated by microorganisms, bad metals, or chemicals.
If people do not eat the right foods, they can become sick. 
If people eat too much food, they can become overweight or obese. This is also bad for people's health.
Food in religions.
Many cultures or religions have food taboos. That means they have rules what people should not eat, or how the food has to be prepared. Examples of religious food rules are the "Kashrut" of Judaism and the "Halal" of Islam, that say that pig meat cannot be eaten. In Hinduism, beef is not allowed to be eaten. Some Christians believe to be "vegetarian" (Someone that doesn't eat meat)

</doc>
<doc id="283" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=283" title="Fine">
Fine

If someone is found guilty of a crime, their punishment may be to pay a fine, a certain amount of money. In many countries, fines can be ordered by police, court judges and some government officers.
When agreeing to a contract with a business, a customer may agree to certain rules. If the customer breaks the rules, then they agree to pay a fine for doing so. For example, when somebody hires a car and agrees to return it by Friday, they agree that if they do not return the car by Friday, they must pay a $50 fine to the business.
 "This can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".</div >

</doc>
<doc id="284" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=284" title="Frying">
Frying

To fry food is to cook it in hot butter or vegetable oil. We can fry food in a small amount of butter or oil in a pan or in a lot of oil in a pot. Some restaurants also have large deep fryers to fry a lot of food at once.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="285" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=285" title="Fish">
Fish

Fish (plural: fish or fishes) are vertebrates which live in water and breathe using gills.
That is a simple way to define fish, but it is not quite accurate. Some amphibia are not fish, but live in water and have external gills. That is why biologists use a more complicated definition: fish are gill-bearing aquatic vertebrates which lack limbs with digits (fingers & toes).
'Fish' is a paraphyletic term because it lacks a monophyletic group of descendants. In other words, it lacks the land vertebrates or tetrapods, which descended from fish. Fish used to be a class of vertebrates which live in water. Now the term covers five classes of aquatic vertebrates:
There are more fish than tetrapods (land vertebrates): there are over 33,000 described species of fish.
Fish are usually covered with scales. They have two sets of paired fins and several unpaired fins. Most fish are cold-blooded (poikilotherm). A fish takes in the oxygen from the water using gills. There are many different kinds of fish. They live in fresh water in lakes and rivers, and in salt water in the ocean. Some fish are less than one centimeter long. The largest fish is the whale shark, which can be almost 15 meters long and weigh 15 tons. Most fish live in the water. A group of fish called the lungfish have developed lungs because they live in rivers and pools which dry up in certain parts of the year. They burrow into mud and aestivate until the water returns.
Certain animals that have the word "fish" in their name are not really fish: Crayfish are crustaceans, and jellyfish are Cnidarians. Some animals look like fish, but are not. Whales and dolphins are mammals, for example.
Fish or fishes?
Though often used interchangeably, these words have different meanings. Fish is used either as singular noun or to describe a group of specimens from a single species. Fishes describes a group of different species.
Types of fish.
Fish, the oldest vertebrate group, includes a huge range of types, from the Middle Ordovician, about 490 million years ago, to the present day. These are the main groups:
Anatomy.
Bony and cartilagenous fish.
Most kinds of fish have bones. Some kinds of fish, such as sharks and rays, do not have real bones (their skeletons are made of cartilage) they are known as cartilaginous fish.
Fish scales.
All fish are covered with overlapping scales, and each major group of fish has its own special type of scale. Teleosts ('modern' fish) have what are called "leptoid" scales. These grow in concentric circles and overlap in a head to tail direction like roof tiles. Sharks and other chondrichthyes have "placoid" scales made of denticles, like small versions of their teeth. These also overlap in a head to tail direction, producing a tough outer layer. Shark skin is available for purchase as shagreen, a leather which as original is smooth in one direction, and rough in the other direction. It may be polished for use, but is always rough in texture and resistant to slipping.
The scales are usually covered with a layer of slime which improves passage through the water, and makes the fish more slippery to a predator.
Swimming.
Fish swim by exerting force against the surrounding water. There are exceptions, but this is usually done by the fish contracting muscles on either side of its body in order to generate waves of flexion that travel the length of the body from nose to tail, generally getting larger as they go along. Most fishes generate thrust using lateral movements of their body & tail fin (caudal fin). However, there are also species which move mainly using their median and paired fins. The latter group profits from the gained manoeuvrability that is needed when living in coral reefs for example. But they can not swim as fast as fish using their bodies & caudal fins.
Muscle.
Fish can swim slowly for many hours using red muscle fibres. They also make short, fast bursts using white muscle. The two types of muscle have a fundamentally different physiology. The red fibres are usually alongside a much greater amount of white fibres.
White fibres.
The white fibres get their energy by converting the carbohydrate glycogen to lactate (lactic acid). This is anaerobic metabolism, that is, it does not need oxygen. They are used for fast, short bursts. Once the lactic acid builds up in the muscles, they stop working, and it takes time for the lactate to be removed, and the glycogen replaced. Using their white fibres, fish can reach speeds of 10 lengths per second for short bursts.
Red fibres.
Swimming for long periods needs oxygen for the red fibres. The oxygen supply has to be constant because these fibres only operate aerobically. They are red because they have a rich blood supply, and they contain myoglobin. Myoglobin transports the oxygen to the oxidising systems. Red muscle gets its energy by oxidising fat, which weight for weight has twice as much energy as carbohydrate or protein. Using their red fibres, fish can keep up a speed of 3–5 lengths per second for long periods.
Body shape.
The shape of the body of a fish is important to its swimming. This is because streamlined body shapes makes the water drag less. Here are some common fish shapes.
Streamlining.
The picture on the right shows a shark. This shark's shape is called "fusiform", and it is an ovoid shape where both ends of the fish are pointy. This is the best shape for going through water quickly. Fishes with fusiform shapes can chase prey and escape predators quickly. Many live in the open ocean and swim constantly, like marlins, swordfish, and tuna. Ichthyosaurs, porpoises, dolphins, killer whales all have similar shapes. This is an example of convergent evolution.
Eel-like.
The long, ribbon-like shape of an eel's body shows another shape. This enables them to hide in cracks, springing out quickly to capture prey, then returning quickly to their hiding spot.
Flatfish.
Flatfish live on the bottom of the ocean or lake. Most use camouflage: they change colors to match the ocean floor.
Compressed.
Fish with compressed shapes have flat, vertical bodies, with one eye on each side. They swim upright and can be very thin. They usually live in reefs where their flat bodies can slip in and out among the corals, sponges, and rocks, keeping hidden from predators. Angelfish, surgeonfish, and butterflyfish are all compressed fish.
Swimming in groups.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : Shoaling and schooling
Many fish swim in groups a lot of the time. Schools of fish can swim together for long distances, and may be chased by predators which also swim in schools. Casual groups are called 'shoals'.
Fish as food.
People eat many kinds of fish. The fish that people eat most include carp, cod, herring, perch, sardines, sturgeon, tilapia, trout, tuna, and many others. A person who buys and sells fish for eating is called a fishmonger.
The word "to fish" is also used for the activity of catching fish. People catch fish with small nets from the side of the water or from small boats, or with big nets from big boats. People can also catch fish with fishing poles and fishhooks with bait. This is often called angling. Anglers also different types of fishing lures. 
For more details, see Fishing
Fish as pets.
Some people keep fish as pets. Goldfish and Siamese Fighting Fish are popular types of pet fish. Koi and other ornamental fish are often kept by groups of people in public ponds for their beauty and calming nature.

</doc>
<doc id="286" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=286" title="Foot">
Foot

A foot (one "foot", two or more feet) is a body part on the end of a leg. We use it when walking, and it is important for balance: it helps us stand straight. We also use it to kick, in both fighting and sports, football being an example.
People's hands and feet have the same shape: they both have five "digits" (the fingers and toes). Many other animals with backbones also have five digits. The part of the foot which joins it to the leg is called the "heel". The bottom of the foot is called the "sole". Half the bones in our body are in the foot. Doctors who work with people's feet are "podiatrists" or "chiropodists".
Many animals have feet, and there are many different sorts of foot. The hard foot of an undulate is a hoof. When an animal has soft feet, or feet with soft parts on the underside, we often call it a "paw". 
In many societies, people like to cover the foot when they are with others, especially outside. In many cultures (for example North American, European, Japanese and others) people wear clothing over the foot to keep it safe. This footwear has special names, for example "sandals", "shoes", and "boots". When people always wear footwear, especially in hot places or when they are very active, their feet can smell badly ("foot odour"). If footwear is too big or small, it can be bad for the feet when the person wears the shoe because it can cause long term damage. People who have foot, leg, and back problems can also get help from special shoes. 
People have different traditions in different parts of the world for when to wear footwear. For example, in much of Europe and Canada, people usually do not wear their shoes or boots in a home or visiting. In the United States people often wear shoes inside a home. In Japan, people do not wear shoes in homes, and floors are often made of very soft materials, too soft for shoes. In cultures where people always wear shoes, people sometimes think it is bad not to wear them. Not wearing shoes can be good for the feet, especially for children's feet.
Conditions like Athlete's foot affect the feet, causing the feet to feel dry and cracked.
Bones.
In a human foot, there are 26 bones. They are made up of 14 phalanges (toes), 5 metatarsals (sole bones) and 7 tarsals (ankle bones).

</doc>
<doc id="291" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=291" title="France">
France

France (French: "France" 
 
), officially the French Republic (French: "République française" 
 
), is a country in Western Europe. Its capital city is Paris. It is a member of the European Union. It is known for its culture, its many monuments and structures, and places such as the Louvre, the Eiffel Tower, the Arc de Triomphe, Giverny, Mont Saint Michel, Versailles, and Notre Dame de Paris. France is divided into 22 "régions" that are further subdivided "départements".
The country has been one of the great powers since the end of the 17th century. In the 18th and 19th centuries, it built a big colonial empire across West Africa and Southeast Asia. Nowadays, this does not exist. It is the most visited country in the world. About 82 million foreign tourists visit it every year. France is a founding member of the European Union. It has the largest land area of any member. France is also a founding member of the United Nations, and a member of the G8 and NATO. It is one of the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council. It has nuclear weapons, including active warheads, and also has nuclear power plants.
Some well-known cities in France include Paris, Lyon, Marseille, Bordeaux, Lille, Toulouse, Nice, Strasbourg, Rennes and Nantes.
Geography and climate.
France is in Western Europe. France has borders with Belgium, Luxembourg, Germany, Switzerland, Italy, Monaco, Andorra, and Spain. France has two mountain ranges near its borders: the Alps in the east and the Pyrenees in the south. There are many rivers in France, including the Seine and the Loire. In the north and the west of France, there are low hills and river valleys.
In France there are many different climates. The Atlantic has a major effect on the weather in the north and west. This means the temperature is about the same most of the year. It is in the marine west coast climate region. In the east, winters are cold and the weather is good. Summers are hot and stormy. In the south, winters are cool and wet. Summers are hot and dry. The north has a temperate climate similar to that of the United Kingdom and other Northern European countries.
France has the second-largest Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) in the world. It covers 11,035,000 km2 (4,260,637 sq mi). Only the United States has a larger one.
History.
The name "France" comes from the Latin word "Francia", which literally means "land of the Franks" or "Frankland".
The borders of modern France are about the same as those of ancient Gaul. Celtic Gauls inhabited Ancient Gaul. Julius Caesar conquered Gaul for Rome in the 1st century BC. Eventually, the Gauls adopted Roman speech (Latin, from which the French language evolved) and Roman culture. Christianity first appeared in the 2nd and 3rd centuries AD. It became firmly established by the fourth and fifth centuries.
In the 4th century AD, the Germanic tribes, principally the Franks invaded the Gauls. This is how the name "Francie" appeared. The modern name "France" comes from the name of the Capetian Kings of France around Paris. The Franks were the first tribe of Europe after the fall of the Roman Empire to convert to Christianity rather than Arianism. The French called themselves "the most Christian Kingdom of France".
The Treaty of Verdun (843), divided Charlemagne's Empire into three parts. The biggest area was Western Francia. It is similar to modern France.
The Carolingian dynasty ruled France until 987, when Hugh Capet became King of France. His descendants, the Direct Capetians, the House of Valois and the House of Bourbon, unified the country with many wars and dynastic inheritance. The monarchy was the most powerful during the 17th century and the reign of Louis XIV of France. At that time, France had the largest population in Europe. The country had a big influence over European politics, economy, and culture. French became the common language of diplomacy in international affairs. Much of the Enlightenment happened in France. French scientists made big scientific discoveries in the 18th century. France also conquered many overseas possessions in the Americas, Africa and Asia.
France had a monarchy until the French Revolution in 1789. King Louis XVI and his wife, Marie Antoinette, were executed in 1793. Thousands of other French citizens were also killed. Napoleon Bonaparte took control of the Republic in 1799. He later made himself Emperor of the First Empire (1804–1814). His armies conquered most of continental Europe. The metric system was invented by French scientists during the French revolution.
After Napoleon's final defeat in 1815 at the Battle of Waterloo, another monarchy arose. Later Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte created the Second Empire in 1852. Louis-Napoléon was removed after the defeat in the Franco-Prussian war of 1870. The Third Republic replaced his regime.
The large French colonial empire in the 19th century included parts of West Africa and Southeast Asia. The culture and politics of these regions were influenced by France. Many ex-colonies officially speak the French language.
The country was where both the First and Second World Wars took place. During the First World War, millions were killed in the trenches including over a million in the Battle of the Somme. The conditions were very poor. The last surviving veteran was Pierre Picault who died on 20 November 2008 at the age of 109.
During the Second World War, Nazis occupied France. The Allies landed in Normandy on June 6, 1944 and began the Battle of Normandy. German forces lost France in just a few months.
Divisions.
 The 22 regions and 96 departments of metropolitan France includes Corsica ("Corse", lower right). The Paris area is expanded. France is divided into (administrative) regions. 22 of them are in Metropolitan France:
Corsica has a different status than the other 21 metropolitan regions. It is called "collectivité territoriale".
France also has five overseas regions:
Then France is divided into 100 departments. The departments are divided into 342 arrondissements. The "arrondissements" are re-divided into 4,032 cantons. The smallest subdivision is the commune. On January 1, 2008, INSEE counted 36,781 communes in France. 36,569 of them are in metropolitan France and 212 of them are in overseas France.
Government.
The government of France is a semi-presidential system determined by the French Constitution of the French Fifth Republic. The constitution declares the nation to be "an indivisible, secular, democratic, and social Republic". It provides for a separation of powers.
Military.
The French armed forces are divided into four branches:
France has about 359,000 military personnel. France spends 2.6% of its gross domestic product (GDP) on defense. This is the highest in the European Union. France and the UK spend 40% of the EU defence budget. About 10% of France's defence budget is for its nuclear weapons force.
Foreign relations.
France is a member of the United Nations. It is a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council and has veto rights. It is also a member of the World Trade Organisation (WTO). It hosts the headquarters of the OECD, UNESCO and Interpol. In 1953, the United Nations asked France to choose a coat of arms to represent them internationally. The French emblem is now on their passports.
France was a founding member of the European Union. In the 1960s, France wanted to exclude the United Kingdom from the organisation. It wanted to build its own economic power in continental Europe. France and Germany became closer after World War II. This was to try to become the most influential country in the EU. It limited the influence of the new Eastern European members. France is a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO). However, under President de Gaulle, it left the joint military command. In the early 1990s, France received criticism for its underground nuclear tests in French Polynesia. France vigorously opposed the 2003 invasion of Iraq. France retains strong political and economic influence in its former African colonies. For instance it has supplied economic aid and troops for peace-keeping missions in the Ivory Coast and Chad.
Economy.
France is a member of the G8 group of leading industrialised countries. France has the eighth-largest economy in the world by Gross domestic product (GDP) (which takes into account how much it costs to live in different countries and inflation rates). France and 11 other European Union members jointly launched the euro on 1 January 1999 and started using it in 2002.
France's economy has nearly 2.9 million registered companies. The government has a considerable influence over railway, electricity, aircraft, and telecommunications firms (as it owns big companies like SNCF and EDF (French electricity)). France has an important aerospace (design of aircraft and spacecraft) industry led by Airbus. It can also launch rockets from French Guiana.
France has invested a lot in nuclear power. This made France the smallest producer of carbon dioxide among the seven most industrialised countries in the world. As a result, 59 nuclear power plants generate most of the electricity produced in the country (78% in 2006, up from only 8% in 1973, 24% in 1980, and 75% in 1990).
France is the leading agricultural producer and exporter in Europe. France exports wheat, poultry, dairy products, beef, and pork. It is also famous for its wine industry. France received 10 billion euros in 2006 from the European Community as [ subsidies] to its farmers.
At one time, the Factory Act of 1833 limited the workday for women and children to 11 hours a day.
Demographics.
On 1 January 2008, it was estimated that 63.8 million people people live in France, including in the Overseas Regions of France. 61,875,000 of these live in metropolitan France, the part of the country that is within Europe.
Religion.
About 85% of the people living in France are Roman Catholic, 10% are Muslim.
Ethnic groups.
The major ethnic groups living in France today are descended from Celtic people and Roman people. The significant minority groups living in France are:
Culture.
Language.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : French language
French is the official language of France. It belongs to the Romance language group, which includes Italian and Spanish. Many regional dialects are also used in France. Alsatian, a German dialect, is spoken in Alsace and in parts of Lorraine in eastern France. French was the language of diplomacy and culture in Europe between the 17th and 19th century and is still widely used.
Some people in France also speak Basque, Breton, Catalan, Corsican, German, Flemish, and Occitan.
Religion.
France is a secular country and the constitution guarantees freedom of religion. The population is about 51% Roman Catholic, and 31% of people are agnostics or atheists. 4% are Muslim, 3% say they are Protestant and 1% say they are Jewish. 10% are from other religions or do not have an opinion about religion. There are also Zoroastrian, Unitarian Universalist, Jain and Wiccan communities. Religions founded in France include Raelism.
According to a Poll in 2005:
Literature.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : French literature
French literature began in the Middle Ages. French was divided into several dialects at the time. Some authors spelled words differently from one other.
During the 17th century, Pierre Corneille, Jean Racine, Molière Blaise Pascal and René Descartes were the main authors.
In the 18th and 19th centuries, French literature and poetry reached its best. The 18th century saw writings of authors, essayists and moralists as Voltaire and Jean-Jacques Rousseau.
As for French children's literature in those times, Charles Perrault wrote stories such as "Little Red Riding Hood", "Beauty and the Beast", "Sleeping Beauty" and "Puss in Boots".
Many famous French novels were written in the 19th century by authors such as Victor Hugo, Alexandre Dumas and Jules Verne. They wrote popular novels like The Three Musketeers, The Count of Monte-Cristo, Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea, or The Hunchback of Notre-Dame. Other 19th century fiction writers include Emile Zola, Guy de Maupassant, Théophile Gautier and Stendhal.
Sports.
The Tour de France cycling race in July is one of the best-known sporting events. It is a three-week race of around 3,500 km that covers most of France and ends in the centre of Paris, on the "Avenue des Champs-Elysées". Football is another popular sport in France. The French team won the FIFA World Cup in 1998 and the UEFA European Football Championship in 1984 and 2000. France also hosts the 24 Hours of Le Mans car race. France also hosted the Rugby World Cup in 2007 and finished fourth.
France is closely associated with the Modern Olympic Games. At the end of the 19th century, the Baron Pierre de Coubertin suggested having the Olympic Games again. France hosted the Summer Olympics twice, in 1900 and 1924, in Paris. France also hosted the Winter Games three times: in 1924 in Chamonix, in 1968 in Grenoble, and in 1992 in Albertville.
Cuisine.
French cuisine has influenced the style of cooking throughout Europe, and its chefs work in restaurants throughout the world.
The roots of modern "haute cuisine" lie in chefs like La Varenne (1615–1678) and the notable chef of Napoleon, Marie-Antoine Carême (1784–1833). These chefs developed a lighter style of food compared to the food of the Middle Ages. They used fewer spices, and more herbs and creamy ingredients.
Typical ingredients like roux and fish stock, and techniques such as marinading, and dishes such as ragout, were invented. Carême was an expert pâtissier (pastry-maker), and this is still a mark of French cooking. He developed basic sauces, his 'mother sauces'; he had over a hundred sauces in his repertoire, based on the half-dozen mother sauces.
French cuisine was introduced in the 20th century by Georges Auguste Escoffier (1846–1935). He was a genius at organisation. He worked out how to run large restaurants, as in a big hotel or a palace; how the staff should be organised; how the menu was prepared. He had methods for everything. Escoffier's largest contribution was the publication of "Le Guide Culinaire" in 1903, which established the fundamentals of French cookery. Escoffier managed the restaurants and cuisine at the Savoy Hotel and Carlton Hotel in London, the Hôtel Ritz Paris, and some of the greatest cruise ships.
Escoffier, however, left out much of the culinary character to be found in the regions of France.
Gastro-tourism and the "Guide Michelin" helped to acquaint people with the rich bourgeois and peasant cuisine of the French countryside in the 20th century. Gascon cuisine has also had great influence over the cuisine in the southwest of France. Many dishes that were once regional have proliferated in variations across the country. Cheese and wine are a major part of the cuisine, playing different roles regionally and nationally. In the north of France, people often prefer to use butter to cook. In the south, they prefer olive oil and garlic. In France, each region has its own special dish; choucroute in Alsace, quiche in Lorraine, cassoulet in the Languedoc-Roussillon, and tapenade in Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur.
In November 2010, French gastronomy was added by UNESCO to its lists of the world's 'intangible cultural heritage'.
Tourism.
France is the number one tourist destination in the world. In 2007, 81.9 million foreign tourists visited France. Spain comes second (58.5 million in 2006) and the United States come third (51.1 million in 2006).
Some of the most famous attractions in Paris, are the Eiffel Tower and the Arc de Triomphe. Another one is Mont Saint Michel, in Normandy.
A European Disneyland is located in a suburb east of Paris. The resort opened in 1992 and is also a popular tourist destination in Europe.
Other websites.
Listen to this article · <br>
This audio file was created from an article revision dated 2009-03-17, and does not play the most recent changes to the article. ()
More spoken articles
<indicator name="top-icon"></indicator>

</doc>
<doc id="292" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=292" title="Finland">
Finland

Finland ("Suomi" in Finnish) is a country in the Northern Europe and is a member state of the European Union. Finland is one of the Nordic countries. It is also part of Fennoscandia. Finland is between the 60th and 70th latitudes North. Its neighbours are Sweden in the west, Norway in the north, Russia in the east and Estonia in the south, beyond the sea called Gulf of Finland. Most of the western and southern Finland is seashore of the Baltic Sea.
The capital of Finland is Helsinki. The currency of Finland is the euro (EUR); before 2002 it was the "markka", the Finnish mark (FIM). The president of Finland is Sauli Niinistö. 5.3 million people live in Finland. Finnish and Swedish are the official languages of Finland. Most people in Finland speak Finnish, but about six percent of Finland's people speak Swedish as their mother tongue, living mostly in the western part of Finland and on Åland (Finnish Ahvenanmaa). Finland became independent in 1917.
The most important cities and towns in Finland are Helsinki, Espoo, Tampere, Vantaa, Turku, Oulu, Lahti, Kuopio, Jyväskylä and Pori. 
Finland is a highly industrialized First World country. The most important Finnish industrial products are paper, steel products such as machines, and electronics.
Nokia (the mobile company) is originally a company of Finland, named after a small town called Nokia. 
Also, Finland has had the most least corrupt titles on the Corruption Perceptions Index.
People and culture.
The people of Finland are called Finns. Most Finns speak Finnish as their mother tongue; 6% of Finns have the Swedish language as their mother tongue. Finns also study mandatory English and Swedish in school. Most Finns work either in services (that is: shops, banks, offices or businesses) or in factories. Finns often like saunas and nature. Many Finnish families have summer cottages, small houses where they go to relax on their summer holidays. The most important festivals that Finnish people celebrate are Midsummer and Christmas. Santa Claus is an old Finnish tradition, although later the Coca-Cola company introduced him to the world.
The most popular sports in Finland are ice hockey, skiing, track and field and association football (soccer). Recently Finns have also won many events in swimming, motor sports and gymnastics.
There is a very small group (a minority) of a few thousand Samis (also called Lapps) in the most northern part of Finland, called Lapland. Most of the Samis live in Norway and Sweden. Many Sami people farm reindeers. Originally Samis were hunter-gatherers. In the past the Sami were nomads, but nowadays they live in regular houses.
Very few people in Finland, approximately 2%, are from other countries, The number of foreigners in Finland has recently been growing rapidly.
Nature and weather.
Most of Finland is covered by pine forest. The swan, which was considered holy long ago, is the national bird of Finland. Wood is the most important natural resource of Finland. It is estimated that up to one-third of all wood resources of the European Union are in Finland.
The national animal of Finland is the brown bear. And the largest animal is the elk, a type of moose, which itself is part of the deer family.
There are also hundreds of rivers and thousands of lakes with fresh water. Fishing is a popular sport. It is estimated there are almost 180,000 lakes in Finland.
Many islands in the Baltic Sea belong to Finland, too. Thousands of islands are part of the Åland archipelago. Tourists from all over the world come to see the fells and the northern lights in Lapland.
The highest mountain of Finland is Halti, which is 1328 meters high. The largest lake is Saimaa, 4,400 square kilometres. The longest river of Finland is Tornionjoki. The largest river (by watershed) is Kemijoki, 552 kilometres long.
The weather in Finland varies widely by season. Summer usually lasts from May to early September, and temperatures can reach up to +35 °C. Autumns are dark and rainy. Winter snow usually begins to fall in Helsinki in early December (in Lapland it can fall as early as October) and in the winter the temperature can drop to -30 °C. Winter usually lasts to mid-March, when the snow melts in Helsinki (in Lapland the snow usually doesn't melt until early May), and Spring lasts till late May. Spring can be erratic, and the weather can change from frost to sunshine wthin a matter of days. The famed Northern Lights are common in Lapland.
History of Finland.
People first came to Finland 10,000 years ago. That was just after an ice age, after a glacier that covered the ground had receded.
Some think the first people in Finland already spoke a language that is related to Finnish that is spoken today. It is known for sure that an early form of the Finnish language was spoken in Finland in the Iron Age. (The Iron Age in Finland was 2,500–800 years ago).
The first residents in Finland hunted animals, as "hunter-gatherers". Some people started to farm crops about 5,200 years ago. Farming slowly became more and more popular and became the major way of life until the modern age. 
The ancient Finns were pagans, like most Europeans, as well as most people everywhere. The most important god of the Finnish pantheon was Ukko. He was a god of sky and thunder, much like Odin, another Scandinavian god-king. These powers were common among the pagan god kings in pantheons ranging from the Finnish Ukko, to the Scandinavian/Germanic/Saxon Odin, all the way east to Zeus of the Greeks and Jupiter of the Romans. 
Around a thousand years ago when most of Europe were adopting Christianity, eventually Finland followed suit. During the Reformation of Christianity in the 16th century, most Finns became Protestants. Some pagan practices still remain amongst the now Christian Finns, such as bear worship.
From the Middle Ages Finland was a part of Sweden. Then, in the year 1809, Russia took Finland from Sweden. Finland was a part of Russia, but after a short period of time it became autonomous, which means that the Finns essentially controlled Finland, though the Tsar was in control officially. Finns could create their own laws and had their own currency, (called the "markka"), their own stamps and own customs. However, Finland did not have its own army.
On 6 December 1917, Finland became independent, which meant that it no longer was a part of Russia. There was a communist revolution in Russia and after 1922 Russia was a part of the Soviet Union. There were communists in Finland too, who tried to create a revolution in Finland. This attempt at revolution caused the Finnish civil war. The communists lost the civil war, and Finland did not change its old capitalist system.
Stalin, who was the leader of the Soviet Union, did not like having a capitalist country as its neighbour. Stalin wanted Finland to become a communist state and be a part of the Soviet Union. The leaders of Finland refused: they wanted to stay independent. The Soviet Union sent many troops across the eastern border of Finland to try to make Finland join them, which resulted in the [[Winter War. There were many battles, that eventually resulted in Finland losing areas along its eastern border to the Soviet Union.
[[Adolf Hitler]] was the dictator of Germany, and wanted to invade the Soviet Union. Finland wanted to retrieve the areas that it had lost, so they joined the German invasion, which started in 1941. This part of the [[Second World War]] is called the [[Continuation War]] in Finland. However, Finland was not a [[fascism|fascist]] or an [[antisemitism|antisemitic]] country. Finns were interested in freedom rather than dictatorship.
While Germany was losing the war, Finland had already progressed into the Soviet Union in order to regain the areas lost in the previous peace. Finland wanted to end the war with the Soviet Union, which resulted in peace, but once again Finland had to relinquish the areas that they had conquered. This time, the peace with the Soviet Union made Finland and Germany enemies. Finns fought Germans, and Germans retreated to [[Norway]], burning down all of Lapland behind them. This is called War of [[Lapland]]. Finland remained independent.
After the war, many factories were built in Finland. Many people moved from farms to cities. At that time, big factories manufactured products like [[paper]] and [[steel]]. More and more people worked in more advanced jobs, like [[high technology]]. Also, many people went to universities to get a good education. Finland was one of the first countries where most people had [[Internet]] connections and mobile phones. A well-known company that makes [[mobile phone]]s, [[Nokia]], is from Finland.
Finland joined the [[European Union]] in 1995. The Finnish currency, the "[[markka]]" (mark), was changed to the European Union's currency, the [[euro]], in 2002.
Other websites.
[[Category:Finland| ]]
[[Category:European Union member states]]
[[Category:Nordic countries]]

</doc>
<doc id="293" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=293" title="Fruit">
Fruit

Fruit is a part of flowering plants. Fruit is the means by which plants disseminate seeds.

</doc>
<doc id="294" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=294" title="Farm">
Farm

A farm is a piece of land used to grow crops and/or raise animals.
People who grow these plants or raise these animals are called farmers. This type of work is called farming. 
Land that is used to grow plants for food, or could be used to grow plants for food is called arable land. A life raising animals for food is called a pastoral life. 
Many farms are very large and can cause damage. in some places farms are many and small. 
There are many types of farming. Some people farm to eat the food they produce (subsistence agriculture). Other farms, including large ones, sell their products to many people far away in urban areas (industrial farming). Most subsistence farms are in poorer countries, while industrial farms are in richer countries.
Related pages.
 "This can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".</div >

</doc>
<doc id="296" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=296" title="Geography">
Geography

 Geography is the study of the Earth and its features, its inhabitants, and its phenomena. The word "geography" comes from the Greek words "gê" ("Earth") and "graphein" ("to write, draw"). It means "to write and draw about the Earth". The word was first used by a scientist called Eratosthenes (276-194 B.C.).
Its features are things like continents, seas, rivers and mountains. Its inhabitants are all the people and animals that live on it. Its phenomena are the things that happen like tides, winds, and earthquakes.
A person who is an expert in geography is a geographer. A geographer tries to understand the world and the things that are in it, how they started and how they have changed.
Geography is divided into two main parts called physical geography and human geography. Physical geography studies the natural environment and human geography studies the human environment. The human environmental studies would include things such as the population in a country, how a country's economy is doing, and more. There is also environmental geography.
Geographers need to know a lot about maps because maps are very important for understanding geography. Geographers use maps a lot, and often make them. Making maps is called cartography, and similarly, people who make maps are cartographers.
Natural environment.
Geographers studying the natural environment or physical geography may look at:
Human environment.
Geographers studying the Human environment may look at:

</doc>
<doc id="297" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=297" title="Good">
Good

The word good can be an adjective that means something that is wanted. Something that is good is not bad. See good in the dictionary.
Good can also mean:
 
 

</doc>
<doc id="298" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=298" title="Goodness">
Goodness

Goodness can mean that something is good, or it can mean the amount that something is good.
For example, Torah is good. 
What goodness is has been talked about by philosophers who try to explain what goodness is.
In food, goodness is the part that is beneficial.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="299" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=299" title="Grammar">
Grammar

Grammar means the rules about how to speak and write in a language. The Ancient Greeks used to call it "grammatikē tékhnē", the craft of letters. It can have any of these meanings:
When we speak, we use the native-person's grammar, or as near as we can. When we write, we try to write with correct grammar. So, speaking and writing a language each have their own style.
Different languages.
All languages have their own grammar. Most European languages are rather similar, but some, such as Chinese and Japanese, are very different from all European languages.
English makes few changes to its word endings ('suffixes'). In the Italic or 'Romance' languages (such as French, Italian, and Spanish), word endings carry a lot of meaning. In English we have just a few: plurals and possessives ("John's") are the most common. In our verbs we have dropped most endings except one: I love, you love, but "she loves". That final 's' is a remnant of Anglo-Saxon, which had more suffixes. Verbs do have endings which show changes in tense: walked, walking.
Word order is the other big difference. Romance languages normally put adjectives after the nouns to which they refer. For example, in English, a person may say "I like fast cars", but in Spanish, it is "Me gustan los coches rápidos". The order of the words has changed: if just the words, without the grammar, are translated into English, it would mean 'to me they please the cars fast'. This is because Spanish and English have different rules about word order. In German, verbs often come near the end of sentences (as: "Die Katze hat die Nahrung gegessen."), whereas in English we usually put them between subject and object, as: "the cat has eaten the food".
Changing language.
Written grammar changes slowly but spoken grammar is more fluid. Sentences which English speakers find normal today, might have seemed strange 100 years ago. And they might not, because many of our favourite sayings come from the Authorized King James Version of the Bible, and from Shakespeare.
Some people use grammar that is different from other people when speaking. For example, people who use what is called or BBC English might say, "I didn't do anything", while someone who speaks what is called or AAVE might say, "I didn't do nothing". London working class version: "I ain't done nuffink!" These are called "double negatives", and are found almost entirely in spoken language, not written language.
These differences are called . The dialect a person uses is usually decided by where they live. Even though the dialects of English use different words or word order, they still have grammar rules. However, when writing in American English, grammar uses the rules of General American English. When people talk about using 'proper English', they usually mean using the grammar of general British English, as described in standard reference works. The models for "spoken" English in Britain are often called Received Pronunciation or BBC English.
Syntax.
Grammar studies syntax as well as the different parts of language. These are called "parts of speech". They fit together according to rules and create sentences. Sentences fit together and create paragraphs.
Parts of speech.
Grammar studies nouns, pronouns, verbs, adjectives, adverbs, prepositions, conjunctions, sentences, phrases, clauses, interjections. 
Nouns.
Nouns are 'thing' words like 'table and 'chair'. They are objects, things you see in everyday life. Proper nouns are places, people's names, or other things like days of the week. The name 'James' is a proper noun, as is 'Wednesday' and 'London'. Nouns can also be abstract things, such as 'suffering' or 'happiness'.
Verbs.
Verbs describe actions and states. Action: "John threw the ball". State: "I am worried". The basic verb form is called the infinitive. The infinitive for existence is "to be". A famous example is the speech of Hamlet: "To be or not to be, that is the question".
Variations of the infinitive create verb tenses. 

</doc>
<doc id="300" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=300" title="Great Lakes">
Great Lakes

The Great Lakes are five large lakes in east-central North America. They hold 21% of the world's surface fresh water. 
The lakes are:
Geography.
Four of the Great Lakes are on the border between Canada and the United States of America. The other, Lake Michigan, is completely inside the United States.
All together, by volume, they are the largest group of fresh water lakes in the world. No one of the Lakes is larger than Lake Baikal (Russia) or Lake Tanganyika (East Africa).
The cities of Chicago, Illinois (9.8 million people, on Lake Michigan), Toronto, Ontario (5.5 million, on Lake Ontario); Detroit, Michigan (5.3 million, on the Detroit river); Montreal, Quebec (3.9 million, on the St. Lawrence River), Cleveland, Ohio (2.9 million, on Lake Eyrie) and Ottawa (1.2 million, Ontario, on the Ottawa River) are on the shores of the Great Lakes or their rivers.
Though the five lakes have separate basins, they form a single, connected body of freshwater. The lakes connect the east-central interior of North America to the Atlantic Ocean. Water flows from Lake Superior and Lake Michigan into Lake Huron; then through the Detroit River into Lake Erie; then through Niagara Falls into Lake Ontario; and then through the Saint Lawrence River to the Atlantic Ocean. Water also drains from the Chicago River on the south.
Many rivers flow through a large watershed into the lakes. The lakes have about 35,000 islands. The Great Lakes region includes the five lakes and many thousands of smaller lakes, often called "inland lakes".
Lake Michigan and Lake Huron hit all-time record low levels in 2013.
The unusual shape of the Great Lakes has created the possibility of large waves called seiche. If a storm causes a fast, strong increase in air pressure on one side of a lake, the water level on that side of the lake will drop and suddenly push up the water level on the opposite side of the lake. A 10 foot tall wave in Chicago caused several deaths in 1954.
Ecological threats.
The Great Lakes are home to a variety of species of fish and other organisms. In recent years, overfishing caused a decline in lake trout. The drop in lake trout increased the alewife population. In response, the government introduced salmon as a predator to decrease the alewife population. This program was so successful that the salmon population rose rapidly, and the states surrounding Lake Michigan promoted 'salmon snagging'. This has been made illegal in all of the Great Lakes states except for a limited season in Illinois. Lake Michigan is now being stocked with several species of fish. However, several invader species such as lampreys, round goby, and zebra mussels threaten the native fish populations.
Invasive species.
Accidentally introduced species are a big problem. Since the 19th century about 160 species have invaded the Great Lakes ecosystem, causing severe economic and ecological impacts. According to the Inland Seas Education Association, they deprive fish of food, cause blooms of toxic algae, and foul boats, spawning areas and drinking water intakes. On average a new invasive species enters the Great Lakes every eight months.
Two important infestations in the Great Lakes are the zebra mussel, first discovered in 1988, and the quagga mussel in 1989. These molluscs are efficient filter feeders. They compete with native mussels, and also reduce available food and spawning grounds for fish. 
Also, the mussels hurt utility and manufacturing industries by clogging or blocking pipes. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service estimates that the economic impact of the zebra mussel will be about $5 billion over the next decade. Because the quagga mussel is good at filtering plankton from the lake water, sunlight reaches deeper into the lake. This increases the growth of algae.
Pollution.
Chemicals from industrial plants run off the land into rivers and arrive in the lakes. Some of these chemicals are highly toxic, such as mercury. Contaminated water from sewer overflows also reaches the lakes, and beaches get closed because of the threat of pathogenic bacteria.

</doc>
<doc id="302" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=302" title="GNU Free Documentation License">
GNU Free Documentation License

The GNU Free Documentation License (GFDL) is a copyleft license for open content. It was made up by the Free Software Foundation (FSF) for the GNU project. It was initially created for use with software documentation, but can be applied to other types of works as well, such as Wikipedia. 
As a copyright license, the GFDL is a type of contract between the creator of a copyrightable work (such as a book, an encyclopedia article, a painting, or a piece of music) and anyone else who might want to use it. The GFDL is considered "copyleft" because the license is meant to make it easier to use and re-use the copyrighted work, not to restrict its use. 
If a copyrightable work is released under the GFDL, the creator of the work is saying that anyone else may reproduce, distribute, or modify the work, as long as they follow a set of requirements specified in the GFDL. Among the requirements of the GFDL are that any new work created from the original work is also licensed under the GFDL—that is, once something is licensed as GFDL, it will always stay licensed as GFDL, and anything which uses it also is licensed as GFDL. (Because the license "reproduces" and stays with the work, this is sometimes called a "viral" license.)
The GFDL also says that in order to distribute or modify a work licensed with the GFDL, the re-user must give credit to any previous authors of the work, and include a list of changes they made to the work. 
Finally, any work licensed with the GFDL must contain, somewhere, the entire text of the license. This provision has been criticized, because it is not always easy to include an entire, long license with a copyrighted work. In a book, for example, it is easy to include one extra page with the license, but if the work is something like a song, or a photograph, it is not easy. 
The GFDL has other requirements that are more complicated. For example, if part of the work is labeled as an "invariant section," it cannot ever be removed or changed by someone using the work ("invariant" means "does not change"). 
Works licensed under the GFDL may be included in with non-GFDL-licensed works only if it is clear which parts of the work are licensed as the GFDL. For example, in a book of poetry it would be easy to label some poems as licensed under the GFDL and some not licensed under it. But it would not be easy to label if part of a song was licensed as GFDL and the rest was not, so this would not be allowed. 
Any use of GFDL material which violates the terms of the GFDL is potentially copyright infringement.
A number of online projects use the GFDL. An online project to license its content under the GFDL is Wikipedia.
The GFDL has been criticized by many people who wish that it made it even easier for content to be re-used. Among the criticisms are that it is very hard to combine GFDL material with other copyleft licenses, that it is not always clear and easy to understand, and that some of its requirements, such as the "invariant sections", are not free at all. 

</doc>
<doc id="304" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=304" title="Glass">
Glass

Glass is a hard material that can be made in many shapes. It is usually transparent, but it can also be made in colours. Glass is made of sand that is heated until it is liquid. When it is liquid, it is shaped and left to cool.
Glass is often used to make windows and bottles. Many churches have windows made of colored glass.
Glass is used to make lenses. The word "glasses" is often used to mean eyeglasses.
The myth that glass is actually a liquid comes from the fact that old windows in houses and churches (200–300 years old) are sometimes a little out of shape: thicker at the bottom than the top. This is actually due to the process of glass making in the past which led to the glass pane being thicker at one edge than the other. It was sensible to install the windows with the thick edge at the bottom. Sometimes a window can be found with the thick edge at the top of the window.
Glass can be recycled over and over. Glass bottles and jars can easily be recycled to make new glass bottles and jars or used in industry as aggregate (building material) or sand.

</doc>
<doc id="305" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=305" title="God">
God

This page is about "God" in the context of monotheism. For the general concept of "a god", see Deity. 
God is the maker of the earth and of everything, according to certain religions and mythologies. Hinduism says there is more than one god. Theists believe that God created everything that exists. In most religions, God is believed to be immortal (cannot die), and to have powers to control nature far beyond the powers of humans.
The belief that there is at least one god is usually called theism. People who reject belief that any deities exist are called atheists. Agnostics think we cannot know for sure whether any deities exist, but still might (or might not) believe at least one deity exists. People who believe in a god but not in religion are called "deists". People who believe that the definition of "God" should be defined before taking a theological position are ignostic.
In some religions there are many gods. This is called polytheism. In other religions, there is only one, which is called monotheism. In polytheism the word "gods" is usually written in lowercase letters. "God" is usually written with an uppercase letter when only one god is believed to exist. Some polytheists also use uppercase when talking about their most important god.
Does God exist?
Many people have asked themselves if God exists. Philosophers, theologians and others have tried to prove that it exists, others have tried to show that it does not exist. In philosophical terminology, such arguments are about the epistemology of the ontology of God. The debate exists mainly in philosophy since science does not address whether or not supernatural things exist.
There are many philosophical issues with the existence of God. Some definitions of God are not specific. Arguments for the existence of God typically include metaphysical, empirical, inductive, and subjective types. Some theories are built around holes in evolutionary theory, as well as order and complexity in the world. Arguments against the existence of God typically include empirical, deductive, and inductive arguments. Conclusions sometimes include: "God does not exist" (strong atheism); "God almost certainly does not exist" ("de facto" atheism); "no one knows whether God exists" (agnosticism); "God exists, but this cannot be proven or disproven" (deism or theism); and "God exists and this can be proven" (theism). There are many variations on these positions, and sometimes different names for some of them. For example, the position "God exists and this can be proven" is sometimes called "gnostic theism" or "strong theism".
Names.
There are different names for God in different religions. Some examples are Allah in Islam, Yahweh or Elohim in Judaism, Baha in Bahá'í Faith, Waheguru in Sikhism, and Ahura Mazda in Zoroastrianism.
Believing in God.
In the year 2000, approximately 53% of the world's population were part of one of the three main Abrahamic religions (33% Christian, 20% Islam, less than 1% Judaism), 6% with Buddhism, 13% with Hinduism, 6% with traditional Chinese religion, 7% with various other religions, and less than 15% as non-religious. Most of these religious beliefs involve God or gods.
God in the Abrahamic religions.
Abrahamic religions are very popular monotheistic ones. Well-known Abrahamic religions include Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. Monotheistic means the people in these religions believe there is only one God. The name of God is usually not allowed to be said in Judaism, but some Jews today call him YHWH (Yahweh) or Jehovah. Muslims say the word Allah, which is the Arabic word for "The God." 
Believers in the Abrahamic religions (except Islamic believers) believe that God has created human beings in his image or likeness, but this idea is rarely taken literally. The idea of an old man with a beard has been used in art since the Renaissance, but is not what most monotheists actually believe he looks like.
God in Christianity.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : God in Christianity
The Christian Bible talks about God in different ways. Christians say that the Old Testament talks about "God the Father". The New Testament is about Jesus, or "God the Son". Many Christians also believe that Jesus was God's incarnation on earth. Christians consider the Holy Spirit to be God as well.
In the New Testament, there are three beings who are said to be God in different forms: the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit (also known as the Holy Ghost). This is called the Holy Trinity by most people who believe in it. Although the word "Trinity" is not in the Bible, the word used for God in chapter one of Genesis is plural, and the words ' in the name of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit' are used in the New Testament, (e.g. Matthew 28:19) Another word that most Christians believe means the same thing as "Trinity" is Godhead. 
Some believe that Jesus was just a man that talked about God.Members of the Unitarian Church have these beliefs.
Christians believe that God turned into a man named Jesus, and came to Earth to save everyone from sin. When Jesus prayed and talked to God, he called him "Father," and taught others to do the same.
God in Eastern religions.
In Hinduism, there is only one God, named Brahman, but Brahman is said to have taken on many different incarnations. Some of these are Rama, Krishna, Buddha, Shiva, Kali, Parvati, and Durga. To many outsiders, the worship of God's different incarnations is considered to be the worship of many gods. However, it is really only the worship of one God in different ways.
Some Hindus also believe that the spirit of God lives in everyone. This idea is called Advaita Vedanta, which is the Hindu term for Monism.
Religions like Buddhism and Confucianism involve the worship of many gods, or sometimes no gods at all.
God in Western philosophy.
Philosophers can talk about God or god; sometimes they talk about a specific god, but other times they are just talking about the idea of god.
One of the earliest Western philosophers to write about God in a monotheistic way was the Greek Aristotle, who describes god as the Supreme Cause. Aristotle saw God as a being that makes everything happen, but is not influenced by anything else.
There are also some philosophical problems with God. One of them is called God paradox. It is a question about whether (an omnipotent) God can make a mountain that is so heavy he cannot lift it.
References.
 Find more information on God by searching one of Wikipedia's :
 Dictionary definitions from Wiktionary<br>
 from Wikibooks<br>
 from Wikiquote<br>
 from Wikisource<br>
 from Commons<br>
 from Wikinews<br>
 from Wikiversity<br>
 from Wikispecies<br>
 from Wikidata<br>
 from MediaWiki

</doc>
<doc id="306" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=306" title="Ghost">
Ghost

A ghost is considered to be the spirit of a dead person. Scientists say that there are no real ghosts, but many people believe that there are.
There are many stories about ghosts in books and movies. Sometimes the ghost is the spirit of a person who was killed or who died. The ghost may stay on Earth because he or she has unfinished problems or is still trying to say good bye to loved ones. Sometimes ghosts are said to live in a particular locality, for example an abandoned house.
Sometimes the ghosts in these stories exist because of some problem the person had during life or to say good bye to loved ones, that was not solved before he or she died. The ghost stays on the Earth trying to fix the problem. If the problem is fixed, the ghost can leave the Earth. Many people say they have seen or heard ghosts. People who try to talk to ghosts as their job are called mediums.
There can be bad ghosts and there can also be good ones. There have never been any ghosts that have actually hurt or killed people, although people tell stories about it.
Many people believe they have seen ghosts. Others believe they have felt ghosts near them. Often the ghost is said to appear as a feeling of cold and a light or a misty cloud, but sometimes people say they have seen ghosts that look more like people. Sometimes ghosts are said to come in human form. Some ghosts might cause fear in the person who sees them, by being seen suddenly. Some ghosts are said to be friendly and help people who have problems.
Ghosts are said to form right after they die, or even centuries later. Many people make up stories or urban legends. Many try to prove the existence of these paranormal creatures with special technology such as heat sensors. They also make TV shows dedicated to proving the existence of ghosts. They often investigate cases where a person has seen one or visit a place of sighting.
Stories of ghosts can be found all over the world. Chinese philosopher Confucius said "Respect ghosts and gods, but keep away from them."
The most feared spirit in Thailand is Phi Tai Hong, the ghost of a person who has died suddenly of a violent death. The Koran discusses spirits known as "jinn". In Europe there is the recurring fear of "returning" or "revenant" deceased who may harm the living. This includes the Scandinavian "gjenganger", the Romanian "strigoi", the Serbian "vampir", the Greek "vrykolakas" among others.

</doc>
<doc id="308" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=308" title="Green">
Green

Green is a color. It is one of the colors of the rainbow. Green is between the yellow and blue colors in a rainbow. Green paint can be made by mixing yellow paint and blue paint together. 
Green light, like all light, is quanta--composed of photons. The wavelength of green light is about 550 nanometers (one-billionth of a meter).
Most leaves of growing plants, such as trees and bushes, are green. This is because there is a chemical in leaves, called chlorophyll, which is colored green.
Tones of green color comparison chart.
Green is a color, the perception of which is evoked by light having a spectrum dominated by range with a wavelength of roughly 570-520 nm.

</doc>
<doc id="309" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=309" title="God's eye view">
God's eye view

God's eye view is a name for a point of view where the speaker or writer assumes they have knowledge only God would have. It appears several ways:
A special case of the last is in a wiki with a GodKing. Often this person can get others to believe what they say about what is right, without making any special effort to be fair to other views.
Many people think Rene Descartes took a God's eye view when he said cogito ergo sum. George Berkeley argued that optics from Isaac Newton and Johannes Kepler also had this problem.

</doc>
<doc id="310" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=310" title="Google">
Google

This page is about the Internet company. For the number, see Googol.
Google Inc. is an American multinational corporation that is best known for running one of the largest search engines on the World Wide Web (WWW). Every day, 200 million (200,000,000) people use it. Google's main office ("Googleplex") is in Mountain View, California, USA.
With Google Search, people can also search for pictures, Usenet newsgroups, news, and things to buy online. By June 2004, Google had 4.28 billion web pages on its database, 880 million (880,000,000) pictures and 845 million (845,000,000) Usenet messages — six billion things. 
"To google," as an action word (verb) means "to search for something on Google". Because Google is so popular (more than half of people on the web use it) it has been used to mean "to search the web". Google dislikes this use since the name of the company is a trademark.
As a public company, Google Inc. trades on the NASDAQ under the tickers and .
In August 2015, Google announced it was being restructured under a new holding company called Alphabet Inc.
History.
Google was started in early 1996 by Larry Page and Sergey Brin, two students at Stanford University, USA. It used to be called Backrub. Later, they made it into a company, Google Inc., on September 7, 1998 at a friend's garage in Menlo Park, California. In February 1999, the company moved to 165 University Ave., Palo Alto, California. Later that year, it moved to another place, now called the "Googleplex".
In September 2001, Google's rating system ("PageRank", for saying which information is more helpful) got a U.S. Patent. The patent was to Stanford University, with Lawrence (Larry) Page as the inventor (the person who first had the idea).
Google makes an important, though shrinking, percentage of its money through its friends like America Online and InterActiveCorp. It has a special group known as the Partner Solutions Organization (PSO) which helps make contracts, helps making accounts better, and gives engineering help.
How Google makes money.
Google makes money by advertising. People or companies who want to make other people visit their website give Google money, and Google shows an advertisement to people Google thinks will click on the advertisement. Google only gets money when people click on the link, so it tries to know as much about people as possible to only show the advertisement to the "right people". It does this with Google Analytics, which sends data back to Google whenever someone visits a web site. From this and other Data, Google makes a profile about the person, which it then uses to figure out which advertisements to show.
The name "Google".
The name "Google" is a misspelling of the word "googol". Milton Sirotta, nephew of U.S. mathematician Edward Kasner, made this word in 1938, for the number 1 followed by one hundred zeroes (formula_1). It is said that the word "googol" was chosen as a name for this number because it sounded like baby talk. Google uses this word because the company wants to make lots of stuff on the Web easy to find and use. Andy Bechtolsheim first thought of the name. 
The name for Google's main office, the "Googleplex," is a play on a different, even bigger number, the "googolplex", which is 1 followed by one googol of zeroes.
Other websites.
 Find more information on Google by searching one of Wikipedia's :
 Dictionary definitions from Wiktionary<br>
 from Wikibooks<br>
 from Wikiquote<br>
 from Wikisource<br>
 from Commons<br>
 from Wikinews<br>
 from Wikiversity<br>
 from Wikispecies<br>
 from Wikidata<br>
 from MediaWiki

</doc>
<doc id="311" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=311" title="Gallon">
Gallon

A gallon is a unit of measurement used to measure volume. People have used many different gallons throughout history. There are three types of gallon still in use.

</doc>
<doc id="312" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=312" title="Government">
Government

A government is a group of people that have the power to rule in a territory, according to the law. This territory may be a country, a state or province within a country, or a region. 
Types of governments.
Democracy.
The most common type of government in the Western world is called democracy. In democracies, people in a country can vote during elections for representatives or political parties that they prefer. The people in democracies can elect representatives who will sit on legislatures such as the Parliament or Congress. Political parties are organizations of people with similar ideas about how a country or region should be governed. Different political parties have different ideas about how the government should handle different problems. Democracy is the government of the people, by the people and for the people. 
However, many countries have forms of democracy which limit freedom of choice by the voters. One of the most common ways is to limit which parties who can for parliament, or limit the parties access to mass media such as television. Another way is to rig the voting system by removing votes from opposition voters and substituting votes for the party in power. Few countries are textbook democracies, and the differences between them has been much studied.
Monarchy.
A monarchy is a government ruled by a king or a queen who inherits their position from their family, which is often called the "royal family." There are two types of monarchies: absolute monarchies and constitutional monarchies. In an absolute monarchy, the ruler has no limits on their wishes or powers. In a constitutional monarchy a ruler's powers are limited by a document called a constitution.
Aristocracy.
An aristocracy is a government by the "best" people. A person who rules in an aristocracy is an aristocrat. Aristocracy is different from nobility, in that nobility means that one bloodline would rule, an aristocracy would mean that a few or many bloodlines would rule, or that rulers be chosen in a different manner.
Dictatorship.
Under a dictatorship, the government is run by one person who has all the power over the people in a country. Originally, the Roman Republic made dictators to lead during time of war. The Roman dictators (and Greek tyrants) were not always bad. The Roman dictators only held power for a small time. In modern times, a dictator's rule is not stopped by any laws, constitutions, or other social and political institutions. After World War II, many governments in Latin America, Asia, and Africa were ruled by dictators. Examples of dictators include Josef Stalin, Adolf Hitler, Idi Amin, Muammar al-Qaddafi, and Gamal Abdul Nasser.
Oligarchy.
An oligarchy is a government ruled by a small group of powerful people. These people may spread power equally or not equally. An oligarchy is different from a true democracy because very few people are given the chance to change things. An oligarchy does not have to be hereditary or passed down from father to son. An oligarchy does not have one clear ruler, but several powerful people. Some past examples of oligarchy are the former Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and Apartheid South Africa. A fictional example is the dystopian society of "Oceania" in the book Nineteen Eighty-Four. Some critics of representative democracy think of the United States as an oligarchy. This view is shared by anarchists.
The history and the theory of government.
The simplest idea of government is those who rule over people and land. This may be as small as a community with some sort of board that looks after the goings on of those who live within it or something a little larger like a village or as big as a continent (like Australia and India). 
Those people who rule the land can allow others to own it. It is a deed by government that gives this right in the way that laws describe. Some think they have the right to hold land without government permission. This view is called libertarianism. Others think they can do so together as a group with others if they live in peace, without government. This view is called anarchism. 
Almost every place on Earth is connected to one and only one government. Places without government are where people follow traditions instead of government rules, small border disputed areas and the continent of Antarctica, because almost no people live there. For every other place on Earth there is a government that claims 'sovereign control' over it. The word "sovereign" is old and means "control by a King" (sovereign). Governments of villages, cities, counties and other communities are also subordinate to the government of the state or province where they exist, and then to that of the country.
It is from Kings and feudalism that modern governments and nation states came. The capital of a country, for instance, is where the King kept his assets. From this we get the modern idea of capital in economics. A government is said to regulate trade as well as to rule over land.
Governments also control people and decide things about what morality to accept or punish. In very many countries, there are strict rules about sexual intercourse and drugs that are part of law and offenders are punished for disobeying them.
Tax is how government is paid for in most countries. People who buy, sell, import, invest, own a house or land, or earn money are made to pay some of the money to a government.
There are many theories of how to organize government better. These are called theories of civics. Because government is run by people who can be greedy, many people think leaders must be elected by some kind of democracy. That way, if government does not act nice, they can be replaced in the next election. Still many countries' governments are not a democracy but other forms in which only a few people have power.
There are many theories of how to run a government better, and keep people from hurting each other. These theories are part of politics. No matter how a government is chosen, it must do politics to keep power.

</doc>
<doc id="314" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=314" title="Galaxy">
Galaxy

A galaxy is a group of many stars, along with gas, dust, and dark matter. The name 'galaxy' is taken from the Greek word "galaxia" meaning milky, a reference to our own galaxy, the Milky Way.
Gravity holds galaxies together against the general expansion of the universe. In effect, the expansion of the universe takes place between groups of galaxies, not inside those groups. This is because the mass of a galaxy holds the galaxy together, and the same applies to the groups of galaxies, such as our Local Group. The gravitation is produced by the matter and energy in a galaxy or group of galaxies. Everything in a galaxy moves around a centre of mass, which is also an effect of gravity. 
There are various types of galaxies: elliptical, spiral and lenticular galaxies, which can all be with or without bars. Then there are irregular galaxies. All galaxies exist inside the universe. There are probably over 170 billion (1.7x1011) galaxies within the observable universe.
Description.
There are galaxies of different sizes. Typical galaxies range from dwarfs with as few as ten million (107) stars up to giants with a hundred trillion (1014) stars, all orbiting the galaxy's center of mass. Galaxies may contain many multiple star systems, star clusters, and various interstellar clouds. The Sun is one of the stars in the Milky Way galaxy; the Solar System includes the Earth and all the other objects that orbit the Sun.
Star clusters are not galaxies, they are inside galaxies. Globular clusters are spherical tightly knit balls of stars which are part of the outer halo of the Milky Way. One of the largest (and oldest) known star clusters, Messier 15, has several million stars, packed closely together, with a black hole at its centre. The stars are too closely packed to get an accurate count, but it certainly has more stars than some of the smaller galaxies. 
Within galaxy clusters, galaxies move relative to other galaxies. They can and do collide. When this happens, the stars generally move past each other, but gas clouds and dust interact, and can form a burst of new stars. Gravity pulls both galaxies into somewhat new shapes, forming bars, rings or tail-like structures.
Many galaxies also continue to form new generations of stars. The Milky Way, and all spiral shaped galaxies like it (see above image of NGC 2997), produce new stars at a rate of one or two stars per year. These stars are formed in the vast interstellar clouds that account for about 1% to 10% of the mass of these galaxies. Globular star clusters, on the other hand, are not currently forming stars because this activity happened billions of years ago and then stopped once all of the gas and dust clouds were used up. 
In the astronomical literature, the word 'Galaxy' with a capital "G" is used for our galaxy, the Milky Way. The billions of other galaxies are just written as 'galaxy' with a lowercase "g". The term "Milky Way" first came out in the English language in a poem by Chaucer.
Error: No text given for quotation (or equals sign used in the actual argument to an unnamed parameter)
When William Herschel wrote his catalogue of deep sky objects, he used the name "spiral nebula" for objects like the Andromeda Galaxy, but nebula is now only used for diffuse structures within a galaxy.

</doc>
<doc id="315" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=315" title="Geometry">
Geometry

Geometry is a kind of mathematics that studies the size, shapes, and positions of things. There are flat (2D) shapes and solid (3D) shapes in geometry.
Squares, circles and triangles are some of the simplest shapes in flat geometry. Cubes, cylinders, cones and spheres are simple shapes in solid geometry.
Uses.
Geometry can be used to measure the area and perimeter of a flat shape. It can also be used to measure a solid shape's volume and surface area.
Geometry can be used to calculate the size and shape of many things. For example, geometry can help people find: 
Origins.
Geometry began as the art of measuring the shape of land so that it could be shared fairly between people. The word "geometry" means "to measure the land". It has grown from this to become one of the most important parts of mathematics. The Greek mathematician Euclid wrote the first book about geometry. Geometry is one of the oldest branches of mathematics.
Examples.
Geometry starts with a few simple ideas that are thought to be true, called axioms. Such as:

</doc>
<doc id="316" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=316" title="Graph theory">
Graph theory

Graph theory is a field of mathematics about graphs. A graph is an abstract representation of: A number of points are connected by lines. Each point is usually called a "vertex" (more than one are called "vertices"), and the lines are called "edges". Graphs are a tool for modelling relationships. They are used to find answers to a number of problems.
Some of these questions are:
History.
Leonhard Euler used to live in a city that was called "Königberg" for some time. (The city has been called Kaliningrad since 1946). The city is situated on the river Pregel. There is an island in the river, and there are a number of bridges across the river. Euler loved to go for walks, so he asked himself, whether it was possible to do a walk, use each of the bridges once, and come back to the point where he started. In 1736, he published a scientific article where he showed that this was not possible. Today, this problem is known as the Seven Bridges of Königsberg. The article is seen as the first paper in the history of graph theory. 
This article, as well as the one written by Vandermonde on the "knight problem," carried on with the "analysis situs" initiated by Leibniz. Euler's formula was about the number of edges, vertices, and faces of a convex polyhedron was studied and generalized by Cauchy and L'Huillier, and is at the origin of topology.
Over a century after Euler, Cayley studied a special class of graphs, called the "trees. A tree is a graph where there is only one path between two vertices. Cayley tried to solve a problem from differential calculus. His solution influenced the development of theoretical chemistry. The technique he used mainly focused on listing all graphs which had certain properties. Today, this is called "Enumerative graph theory". It developed from Cayleys results, a scientific publication done by Pólya between 1935 and 1937 and the generalization of these by De Bruijn in 1959. Cayley linked his results on trees with the contemporary studies of chemical composition.
The fusion of the ideas coming from mathematics with those coming from chemistry is at the origin of a part of the standard terminology of graph theory. In particular, the term "graph" was introduced by Sylvester in an article published in 1878 in "Nature".
One of the most famous and productive problems of graph theory is the four color problem: "Is it true that any map drawn in the plane may have its regions colored with four colors, in such a way that any two regions having a common border have different colors?" This problem was first posed by Francis Guthrie in 1852 and its first written record is in a letter of De Morgan addressed to Hamilton the same year. Many incorrect proofs have been proposed, including those by Cayley, Kempe, and others. The study and the generalization of this problem by Tait, Heawood, Ramsey and Hadwiger led to the study of the colorings of the graphs embedded on surfaces with arbitrary genus. Tait's reformulation generated a new class of problems, the "factorization problems", particularly studied by Petersen and Kőnig. The works of Ramsey on colorations and more specially the results obtained by Turán in 1941 was at the origin of another branch of graph theory, "extremal graph theory".
The four color problem remained unsolved for more than a century. A proof produced in 1976 by Kenneth Appel and Wolfgang Haken, which involved checking the properties of 1,936 configurations by computer, was not fully accepted at the time due to its complexity. A simpler proof considering only 633 configurations was given twenty years later by Robertson, Seymour, Sanders and Thomas.
The autonomous development of topology from 1860 and 1930 fertilized graph theory back through the works of Jordan, Kuratowski and Whitney. Another important factor of common development of graph theory and topology came from the use of the techniques of modern algebra. The first example of such a use comes from the work of the physicist Gustav Kirchhoff, who published in 1845 his Kirchhoff's circuit laws for calculating the voltage and current in electric circuits.
Graph theory in perspective.
Graph theory is an important part of mathematics and computer science. To many such problems, exact solutions do exist. Many times however, they are very hard to calculate. Therefore, very often, approximations are used. There are two kinds of such approximations, Monte-Carlo algorithms and Las-Vegas algorithms.
Graphs are normally represented by two different sets, typically set a graph G would be represented as the collection of the sets V and E. The set V is a discrete set containing all vertices of the graph. The set E is a binary set, whose pairwise elements are elements of set V. Each pair in set E represents an edge connecting two vertices.
If every two nodes have an edge between them, then the graph is called the "complete graph".

</doc>
<doc id="318" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=318" title="Goatee">
Goatee

A goatee is a beard formed by a tuft of hair under the chin, resembling that of a billy goat. 
Other websites.
 "This can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".</div >

</doc>
<doc id="323" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=323" title="Herm">
Herm

For the Ancient Greek herm (sculpture), see Herma.
Herm is the smallest of the Channel Islands that is open to the public.
Herm is only 1½ miles long. Cars are banned from the small island just like its Channel Island neighbour, Sark. Unlike Sark, bicycles are banned too. The sandy white beaches make Herm a walker's paradise.
Population: 60 (2002)
 "This about a  can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="324" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=324" title="History">
History

History is the study of past events. People know what happened in the past by looking at things "from" the past, including records (like books, newspapers and letters) and artifacts (like pottery, tools, and human or animal remains). Libraries, archives and museums collect and keep these things for people to study history. A person who studies history is called a historian. A person who studies pre-history and history through things left behind by ancient cultures is called an archaeologist. A person who studies mankind and society is called an anthropologist. The study of the sources and methods "used to study and write" history is called historiography.
People can learn about the past by talking to people who remember things that happened in the past. This is called oral history. When people who had been slaves and American Civil War survivors got old, some historians recorded everything that they said, so that history would not be lost. 
People in different parts of the world continue to remember events differently, just as in Medieval Europe, Ancient Rome and Ancient China each thought that they ruled the only important parts of the world and that other parts were "barbarian". 
Timeline of history.
Current events, modern economic history, modern social history and modern intellectual history take very different views of the way history has affected the way that we think today.

</doc>
<doc id="325" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=325" title="Health">
Health

Health is "a state of complete physical, mental, and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease" according to the World Health Organization (WHO). "Physical" is about the body. "Mental" is about how people think and feel. "Social" talks about how people live with other people. It is about family, work, school, and friends.
Aspects of health.
Physical health.
Physical fitness refers to good body health, and is the result of regular exercise, proper diet and nutrition, and proper rest for physical recovery. A person who is physically fit will be able to walk or run without getting breathless and they will be able to carry out the activities of everyday living and not need help. How much each person can do will depend on their age and whether they are a man or woman. A physically fit person usually has a normal weight for their height. The relation between their height and weight is called their Body Mass Index. A taller person can be heavier and still be fit. If a person is too heavy or too thin for their height it may affect their health. 
Mental health.
Mental health refers to a person's emotional and psychological well-being. "A state of emotional and psychological well-being in which an individual is able to use his or her thinking and emotional (feeling) abilities, function in society, and meet the ordinary demands of everyday life."
One way to think about mental health is by looking at how well a person functions. Feeling capable and efficient; being able to handle normal levels of stress, have good friends and family, and lead an independent life; and being able to "bounce back," or recover from hardships, are all signs of mental health.
Public health.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : Public health
Public health refers to trying to stop a disease that is unhealthy to the community, and does not help in long life or promote your health. This is fixed by organized efforts and choices of society, public and private clubs, communities and individuals.
It is about the health of many people, or everybody, rather than one person. Public health stops instead of encouraging a disease through surveillance of cases. To prevent being sick, it is good to do healthy behaviors such as hand washing, vaccination programs and using condoms. When infectious diseases break out, washing hands may be especially important.

</doc>
<doc id="326" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=326" title="Harbor">
Harbor

Harbour means to shelter or keep safe. A harbor (or harbour) is a place where ships may shelter. A port is also a harbour, but is usually bigger. The port will often contain a water space with wave breakers around the edge, a number of quays or piers where the ships may be moored or tied up and a transport system for taking goods inland. Often railway and road transport will be used. Other ways that goods can be moved are pipeline transport and by using smaller ships on rivers.
During the D-Day operations of 1944, two [ artificial] harbours (named mulberry) were built just off the beaches where the invasion was going to happen.
Related pages.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="332" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=332" title="Hawaii">
Hawaii

Hawaii is a U.S. state; the only one which is in Oceania. It is the last state which joined the United States. Hawaii became a state on August 21, 1959. It is the only state made only of islands. Hawaii is also the name of the largest island. The capital and largest city of Hawaii is Honolulu on the island named Oahu.
Hawaii is known as the "Aloha State". "Aloha" is a Hawaiian word that has many meanings like welcome, hello and goodbye. Aloha also means love and care. The different meanings are brought together in the term "Aloha Spirit" to describe the friendly people of Hawaii.
The state flower is the yellow hibiscus ("Hibiscus brackenridgei" or ma'o hau hele 
 
). The state bird is the Hawaiian goose (nene). The state fish is the reef triggerfish, also called the "humu humu nuku nuku apua'a 
 
". The state tree is the candlenut, also called "kukui". The state song is Hawaii Ponoi. The state motto is "Ua mau ke ea o ka aina i ka pono 
 
". In English it says, "The life of the land is perpetuated in righteousness".
The first people of Hawaii were Polynesians. They came to the islands sometime between 200 and 600 AD. Captain James Cook is given credit for discovering the islands for the Europeans in 1778. Others may have been there before him. Captain Cook named the islands the Sandwich Islands for the fourth Earl of Sandwich, John Montague.
Kamehameha I was the first king of Hawaii. He united the separate small Hawaiian kingdoms into one large kingdom in 1795. In 1893, American soldiers stopped Queen Liliuokalani from leading Hawaii when American business people took over the government and made their own laws. She was the last monarch of Hawaii. She also wrote the original words of the song called "Aloha Oe".
The American business people made Hawaii into a republic for a short time. The new leader, Sanford Dole was called the President of Hawaii. In 1898, the United States of America took over the government and made Hawaii into a territory. In 1959, Hawaii became the fiftieth American state.
Hawaii is an archipelago; a long chain of islands. There are eight main islands and many small islands and atolls. They are the tops of underwater volcanos. The main islands are Niihau, Kauai, Oahu, Molokai, Lanai, Kahoolawe, Maui and Hawaii.
The biggest industry of Hawaii is tourism. Almost 7 million people visited in 2000. Important exports are sugar, pineapple, macadamia nuts, and coffee.
Popular tourist sites include Waikiki Beach, Hawaii Volcanoes National Park, Polynesian Cultural Center, and the USS Arizona Memorial at Pearl Harbor.

</doc>
<doc id="333" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=333" title="Honolulu">
Honolulu

Honolulu is the capital city of the U.S. state of Hawaii. It is also the largest city in Hawaii and it has the most important harbor. It is on the south-east shore of the island of Oahu.
Etymology.
Honolulu means "sheltered harbor" in the Hawaiian language. No one knows for sure when Honolulu was first settled or when the name was first used.
History.
Honolulu harbor was called Kulolia before foreigners came. The first foreigner was Captain William Brown of the English ship Butterworth, in 1794. He named the harbor Fair Haven. Other foreign captains is started calling it Brown's Harbor. The name Honolulu was used some time after that.
Honolulu quickly became the most important harbor of Hawaii. At that time, sandalwood was a big export. Honolulu was also an important supply point for whalers.
Kamehameha III made Honolulu the capital city of the Kingdom of Hawaii in 1850. It was also the capital of the Republic of Hawaii and the Territory of Hawaii. It stayed the capital when Hawaii became a state in 1959.

</doc>
<doc id="335" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=335" title="Hawaii (island)">
Hawaii (island)

The Island of Hawaiʻi is the largest of the U.S. Hawaiian Islands, and the southern. Called locally the "Big Island," its area is 4,038 sq. miles (10 458 square kilometers). The widest part of the island is 93 miles (150 km) across. 
The Big Island makes up more than half (~62%) of the total land area of the State of Hawaii and is governed by the County of Hawaii.
The island is built from seven separate shield volcanos that erupted more or less one at a time, one partly covering the other. The later volcanoes mostly buried two of the earlier ones. These are (from oldest to youngest): Kohala (extinct), Ninole (extinct, mostly buried), Mauna Kea (dormant), Hualalai (dormant), Mauna Loa (active), Kulani (extinct, mostly buried), and Kilauea (very active). The volcanos, and the islands, were the result of the Pacific oceanic tectonic plate moving over a hotspot. There lava from the Earth's lower mantle or upper core is close to the surface.
The largest city on the island is Hilo. Hilo is filled with historic buildings, interesting shops, parks and has a constant stream of performances, festivals and events. It is on the rainy east side of the island. The city of Kailua-Kona is on the dry west side of Hawaii, and is popular with tourists.

</doc>
<doc id="337" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=337" title="Hawaii Ponoi">
Hawaii Ponoi

"Hawai`i Pono`i" is the state song of Hawaii. The words were written by King David Kalakaua, the music by Prof. Henry Berger, the Royal Bandmaster. "Hawai`i Ponoi" was also the anthem of the Kingdom of Hawai`i and the Territory of Hawai`i.
Lyrics.
Hawai`i pono`i<br>
Nana i kou, mo`i<br>
Kalani Ali`i,<br>
ke Ali`i.<br>
Makua lani e<br>
Kamehameha e<br>
Na kaua e pale<br>
Me ka ihe.<br>
Translation.
Hawai`i's own true sons,<br>
be loyal to your chief<br>
Your country's liege and lord,<br>
the ali'i.<br>
Father above us all,<br>
Kamehameha<br>
Who guarded in the war<br>
With spears.<br>
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".
 "This about the  can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="338" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=338" title="Healing">
Healing

Healing is a process that happens in the body. Through healing, cells are able to repair damaged tissue.
There are two different ways healing can happen:
Most healing processes combine both ways of healing.
Other websites.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="342" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=342" title="History of Australia">
History of Australia

People have lived in Australia for about 40,000–60,000 years. The first people who arrived in what is now Australia were the Australian Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders. Aborigines came by boat from the islands of what is now Indonesia. They lived in all parts of Australia. Their lives were simple, they had very few needs. They lived by hunting, fishing and gathering food. They lived in bands, and they spoke many different languages.
Aborigines invented tools like the boomerang and spear, but did not farm. Tradition was very important in their lives. Their religion is called the Dreaming, which has lots of stories about the creation of the world by spirits. Aboriginal art started at least 30,000 years ago and there are lots of Dreaming stories painted on walls and cut in rocks all around Australia. Aboriginal music has songs about the Dreamtime, sometimes with special instruments like the didgeridoo.
First European explorers.
In 1606 the first European, Dutch explorer Willem Janszoon (1571–1639), visited the west coast of Cape York Peninsula in Queensland. A Spanish explorer, Luis Vaez de Torres sailed through the water between Australia and Papua New Guinea later that year. 
Only after Dirk Hartog chanced upon the west coast in 1616 did other European vessels visit and map the coast. After sixty more ships visited the coast, enough was known for a map to be published in 1811. The land was dry because of not much rain; some was a desert. The explorers thought no crops could be grown and so it would be difficult for people to live there. They decided there would be no economic reasons to stay. 
In 1642, Dutchman Abel Tasman, working for the Dutch East Indies Company reached Tasmania, which he called Antony van Diemenslandt. He then called the continent he charted the north coast of on his second visit in 1644 New Holland. In 1688, the privateer William Dampier became the first Englishman to reach Australia. But in 1770 a British sailor, Captain James Cook, found the fertile east coast of Australia. He called it New South Wales, and claimed it for Britain.
Englishman Matthew Flinders published his map of the coast in 1814, calling it Australia for the first time, a name later formally adopted by the authorities.
Colonial Australia.
The British decided to use the land visited by Captain Cook as a prison colony. Britain needed a place to send its convicts (people who had been sent to jail for theft and other crimes) because its gaols were full and it had just lost its American colonies in the American War of Independence. In 1788 the British First Fleet of 11 ships, carrying about 1500 people arrived at Sydney. Arthur Phillip led them as the first Governor of New South Wales. About 160 000 convicts were brought to Australia from 1788 until 1868. Free immigrants began arriving in the 1790s.
For the first few years they did not have much food, and life was very hard. But soon they began to farm, and more people came. Sydney grew, and new towns were started. Wool brought good money. By 1822, many towns had been set up and people from the towns often visited Sydney for additional economic resources.
Soon people from Sydney found other parts of Australia. George Bass and Matthew Flinders sailed south to Tasmania and a colony was started at Hobart in 1803. Hamilton Hume and William Hovell went south from Sydney by land. They found the Murray River, and good land in Victoria. Thomas Mitchell went inland, and found more rivers. In 1826, the first British military outpost was set up at King George Sound in Western Australia. The Swan River Colony was started in 1829, with townsites at Fremantle and Perth. In 1836, a free-settler colony was started in South Australia, where no convicts were ever sent. Queensland became a separate colony in 1859. As the towns and farms spread across Australia, the Aboriginal people were pushed off their land. Some were killed, and many died from illness and hunger. Soon, Australia's Aborigines were outnumbered by Europeans, and many were made to live on reserves.
The goldrushes of New South Wales and Victoria started in 1851 leading to large numbers of people arriving to search for gold. The population grew across south east Australia and made great wealth and industry. By 1853 the goldrushes had made some poor people very rich.
Convict transportation ended in the 1840s and 1850s and more changes came. The people in Australia wanted to run their own country, and not be told what to do from London. The first governments in the colonies were run by Governors chosen by London. Soon the settlers wanted local government and more democracy. The New South Wales Legislative Council, was created in 1825 to advise the Governor of New South Wales, but it was not chosen by voters. William Wentworth established the Australian Patriotic Association (Australia's first political party) in 1835 to demand democratic government for New South Wales. In 1840, the Adelaide City Council and the Sydney City Council were started and some people could vote for them (but only men with a certain amount of money). Then, Australia's first parliamentary elections were held for the New South Wales Legislative Council in 1843, again with some limits on who could vote. "The Australian Colonies Government Act" [1850] allowed constitutions for New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania. In 1850 elections for legislative councils were also held in the colonies of Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania.
In 1855, limited self government was granted by London to New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania. A new secret ballot was introduced in Victoria, Tasmania and South Australia in 1856, allowing people to vote in private. This system was copied around the world. In 1855, the right to vote was given to all men over 21 in South Australia. The other colonies soon followed. Women were given the vote in the Parliament of South Australia in 1895 and they became the first women in the world allowed to stand in elections. In 1897, Catherine Helen Spence became the first female political candidate.
Australians had started parliamentary democracries all across the continent. But voices were getting louder for all of them to come together as one country with a national parliament.

</doc>
<doc id="346" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=346" title="History of Spain">
History of Spain

Spain is a country in Europe. 
Early History.
People have lived on the Iberian Peninsula for about 500,000 years. Neanderthal man came about 200,000 years ago. Modern humans first came about 40,000 years. 
The Roman Empire controlled Spain for three hundred years; then people from Eastern Europe called Visigoths fought for Spain, won it from the Romans, and controlled Spain for over two hundred years.
9th century.
The Visigoths converted from Arian Christianity to Roman Catholics. The land was won after a war by Muslims who were Arab and Berber. Roman Catholics from Europe eventually decided to fight to take Spain from the Muslims. They fought wars for many hundreds of years, some of which were Crusades against other Christians like the Cathars. These were very cruel wars. 
In the year 1492, they took the last part of Spain that had belonged to the Moors. Boabdil, the last Moorish Leader of Granada, gave the city to King Ferdinand of Aragon on 2 January 1492, and Christians now ruled all of Spain.
Before this, several different kings had ruled different countries in what is now called Spain. Two of these countries, Castile and Aragon, came together when the king of Aragon, Ferdinand II, married the queen of Castile, Isabella.
In the same year, 1492, they decided to send Christopher Columbus to explore the Atlantic Ocean. Columbus found a land there that the people of Europe did not yet know. These were the islands of the Caribbean Sea.
Late 15th century.
Columbus and other sailors explored more and found that there were two continents there - North America and South America. Spain sent many soldiers and businessmen to North and South America, and they took over very large parts of those two continents. Owning this empire made Spain very rich. But when they conquered that empire, they killed millions of the Native Americans who had lived there before. Spain owned this empire for more than three hundred years.
Meanwhile, at home, the Muslim manuscripts had been either burnt or spread to other countries. Jews had been expelled from Spain. The multicultural society was destroyed, and so was the learning. Among the few things kept and respected in Spain were in music: harmony and stringed instruments, and of course the buildings, many of which became churches, by adding crosses.
16th and 17th centuries.
The Spanish Empire was the strongest in the world through most of the next two centuries, thanks to gold from the Americas. This new gold made rulers and colonial governors rich. Meanwhile others' savings became worth less due to inflation. Spain became a society of very rich and very poor. Some of the poorest went to the new colonies in the Caribbean, Central America and South America, mostly to find gold.
Native American peoples were killed by diseases brought by the Spaniards, but most Spaniards did not know this. They found damaged and dying societies with people who had lost some of their most important leaders and thinkers. The Spaniards thought this meant they were inferior, and used this as an excuse to enslave the natives. Millions of natives died mining gold for the Spanish.
The Spanish Empire also at this time funded the Spanish Inquisition which tortured and killed anyone who disagreed with the Roman Catholic Church. The Reformation which created Protestant sects in Europe was not allowed into Spain, it was kept out and, as with Jews or Muslims, its believers were killed.
The nobles of Spain no longer had to fight anyone since the internal feuds were over. No one could challenge their power. In many ways it was held together as a reign of terror. People who challenged them were often called heretics, so that the Inquisition could torture them, and then nobles take the property.
For ordinary people on both sides of the Atlantic Ocean, life got worse. A few rulers got rich. Today we would say that these people were guilty of war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity. Many Church people who had the power to speak out at that time, did so, and they said many of the same things as we would say today. But none of this mattered much to the rulers.
The great satire Don Quixote was written about this time.
18th century.
In the 18th century, there was doubt over who should become king of Spain; this doubt led many of the kings of Europe to fight to become king of Spain. This was called the War of the Spanish Succession. 
France occupied Spain for a long time. This made Spain very weak. It also made Spain lose its empire in North and South America; all of the parts of that empire became their own countries, or were taken over by other countries such as the United States of America.
20th century.
There was not much peace in Spain during the first part of the 20th century. Some Spaniards tried to set up a government chosen by the people (a democracy), and they made the King of Spain leave the country. However, in 1936, two different groups of Spaniards went to war over whether the government should be a democracy, or take orders from one person. In 1939, those who wanted democracy were defeated, and a dictator named Francisco Franco took over the government.
Franco died in 1975. He had decided that Spain should have a king again, and he chose Juan Carlos, the grandson of the king who had been forced to leave the country, to be king. But the king did not rule as a dictator; instead, he chose to set up a democracy. Also since Franco's death, Spain appointed Adolfo Suárez to became Spain's first democratically elected prime minister. Now Spain is a modern democratic country, and does business with many countries around the world. It is a part of the European Union.

</doc>
<doc id="348" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=348" title="Height">
Height

Height is the distance between the lowest end and highest end of an object.
For example, people consider the bottom of the foot a person's lowest end, and the top of the head a person's highest end. If the distance between the bottom of a person's foot and the top of that person's head is 64 inches, then that person's height is 64 inches.
Related pages.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="349" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=349" title="Historian">
Historian

A historian is someone who studies history. Historians study the passage of time and the events that happen within that passage.
References.
Sources.
 "This can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".</div >

</doc>
<doc id="353" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=353" title="Human body">
Human body

The human body is the body of a person. It is the physical structure of a person. 
The body is a thing that can be hurt or killed. Its functions are stopped by death.
Study of the human body.
Some people study the human body. They look at where it is different from or the same as other animals' bodies. These animals can be alive today. Or they can be extinct animals like other hominids. (Hominids are primates that are close to humans. Neanderthals and "Homo erectus" were hominids.) Some people study how the human body works and lives in its environment. Some people study what people think about their body. Artists study how to draw or paint the human body.
Fields of study.
Many different fields of study look at the human:
The human body and other animals.
Scientists think that the human body is very much like other animals. They see that some human "behaviors" are like animal behaviors. (Behaviors are the way an organism acts.) They know that 98% of the DNA in humans is the same as other primates.
DNA sequence differences between humans and chimpanzees.
The animal that is alive now that is closest to humans is the chimpanzee. 98.4% of the DNA is the same between humans and chimpanzees. However, this applies only to single nucleotide polymorphisms, that is, changes in "single" base pairs only. The full picture is rather different.
The draft sequence of the common chimpanzee genome was published in 2005. It showed that the regions which are similar enough to be aligned with one another account for 2400 million of the human genome’s 3164.7 million bases, that is, 75.8% of the genome. 
This 75.8% of the human genome is 1.23% different from the chimpanzee genome in single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs - changes of single DNA “letters” in the genome). Another type of difference, called 'indels' (insertions/deletions) account for another ~3% difference between the alignable sequences. In addition, variation in copy number of large segments (> 20 kb) of similar DNA sequence provides a further 2.7% difference between the two species. Hence the total similarity of the genomes could be as low as about 70%.

</doc>
<doc id="355" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=355" title="Hydrogen">
Hydrogen

! colspan=2 style="text-align: center; background-color: #A0FFA0; color: #008000" | Atomic properties
! Oxidation states
! Electronegativity
! Ionization energies
! Covalent radius
! Van der Waals radius
! colspan=2 style="text-align: center; background-color: #A0FFA0; color: #008000" | Miscellanea
! Crystal structure
! rowspan=1 valign="top" | Magnetic ordering
! Thermal conductivity
! Speed of sound
! CAS registry number
Hydrogen is a chemical element. Its atomic number is 1, which makes it the simplest, known element in the entire universe. Hydrogen is the true primordial substance, the first atom produced after the big bang. All chemical elements were formed from hydrogen by the processes of nuclear fusion.
Hydrogen glows purple when it is in plasma state.
Hydrogen in nature.
In its pure form on Earth, hydrogen is usually a gas. Hydrogen is also one of the parts that make up a water molecule. Hydrogen is important because it is the fuel that powers the Sun and other stars.
Hydrogen makes up about 75% of the entire universe. Hydrogen's symbol on the Periodic Table of Elements is H.
Pure hydrogen is normally made of two hydrogen atoms connected together. Scientists call these diatomic molecules. Hydrogen will have a chemical reaction when mixed with most other elements. It has no color or smell. 
Pure hydrogen is very uncommon in the Earth's atmosphere. In nature, it is usually in water. Hydrogen is also in all living things, as a part of the organic compounds that living things are made of. In addition, hydrogen atoms can combine with carbon atoms to form hydrocarbons. Petroleum and other fossil fuels are made of these hydrocarbons and commonly used to create energy for human use.
Hydrogen has two different isotopes, called deuterium and tritium. Like regular hydrogen, they both have only one proton and one electron, but deuterium also has one neutron and tritium has two. These other types of hydrogen are important in nuclear energy and organic chemistry reactions. 
Some other facts about hydrogen:
History of Hydrogen.
The name "hydrogen" comes from the Greek word for water, 'υδορ (pronounced /HEEW-dor/).
Hydrogen was discovered in 1671 by Robert Boyle even though many people think it was discovered by Henry Cavendish in 1776.
Uses of Hydrogen.
The main uses of hydrogen are in the petroleum industry and in making ammonia by the Haber process. Some is used elsewhere in the chemical industry. A litte of it is used as fuel, for example in rockets for spacecraft. Most of the hydrogen that people use comes from a chemical reaction between natural gas and steam. 
Hydrogen as fuel (fusion).
Nuclear fusion is a very powerful source of energy. It relies on forcing atoms together to make helium and energy, exactly as happens in a star like the Sun, or in a hydrogen bomb. This needs a large amount of energy to get started, and is not easy to do yet. A big advantage over nuclear fission, which is used in nuclear power stations, is that no waste is produced, and no toxic fuel like uranium is needed.
There is more than 600 million tons of hydrogen undergoing fusion every second on the Sun.
Burning Hydrogen.
1. Water can be easily broken down into hydrogen and oxygen with electricity, but it takes a lot of electricity to get a usable amount of hydrogen.
2. Burning hydrogen combines with oxygen molecules to make steam (pure water).
3. A fuel cell combines hydrogen with an oxygen molecule releasing an electron as electricity.
Hydrogen power grid.
For these reasons, many people believe hydrogen power will eventually replace technologies such as diesel-electric engines and biodiesel fuel.
But it is not correct to see hydrogen as a fuel if it is used in a fuel cell. It is more of a replacement for the power grid. Such a grid and infrastructure with new vehicles might be first made in Iceland, a country that has much free geothermal energy and is quite small. Because it imports all fossil fuel, it would help Iceland to completely stop using it. The huge advantage of hydrogen is that when burnt in an engine or in a fuel cell, there is no pollution. Only a small amount of water forms.

</doc>
<doc id="357" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=357" title="Helium">
Helium

! colspan=2 style="text-align: center; background-color: #C0FFFF; color: #008000" | Atomic properties
! Oxidation states
! Electronegativity
! rowspan=2 valign="top" | Ionization energies
! Covalent radius
 pm
! Van der Waals radius
 pm
! colspan=2 style="text-align: center; background-color: #C0FFFF; color: #008000" | Miscellanea
! Crystal structure
! rowspan=1 valign="top" | Magnetic ordering
! Thermal conductivity
! Speed of sound
! CAS registry number
Helium is a chemical element. It has the chemical symbol He, atomic number 2 and atomic weight of about 4.002602. There are 9 isotopes of helium, only two of which are stable. These are 3He and 4He. 4He is by far the most common isotope.
Helium is called a noble gas, because it does not regularly mix with other chemicals and form new compounds. It has the lowest boiling point of all the elements. It is the second most common element in the universe, after hydrogen, and has no color or smell. However, Helium has a blue-ish, neon color when being burnt with fire. Helium does not usually react with anything else. Astronomers discovered helium in 1868. They found that it was in the Sun before it was found on Earth. Because of where it was found, its name comes from the Greek word for Sun, "helios".
Helium is used to fill balloons and airships because it is lighter than air, and does not burn or react, meaning it is normally safe for using it in that way. It is also used in some kinds of light bulbs. People also breathe it in to make their voices sound higher than they normally do as a joke, but this is extremely dangerous if they breathe in too much, since it can kill them because they are not breathing normal air. Breathing too much helium can also cause long-term effects to vocal cords.
It can be created through the process of nuclear fusion in the sun we are currently trying to harness nuclear fusion as a form of power but this is still at an early stage because the sun can quantum tunnel enough because of its huge size). During this process, four Hydrogen atoms are fused together to form one Helium atom.
References.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="358" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=358" title="Home page">
Home page

The home page of a web site is the document that a web server sends to another computer's web browser application when it has been contacted without a request for specific information. That is, when you enter only a domain name in the Address box without specifying a directory or a file, the "home page" is usually the first part of the web site you will be taken to. The Home Page is also called the Main Page.
A properly written home page will tell a user about the information available in the web site, and how to view different parts of the web site.
The home page of "simple.wikipedia.org" can be found at this link.
Home Page was a popular computer application used for composing web pages.
In Linux servers.
In Linux-based servers, the homepage usually is index.html, index.php, index.cgi, etc. Unless the website administrator has created a redirect to a specific webpage.
In Windows servers.
However, in Windows-based servers, the homepage is default.html, default.php, etc. This is a problem for website administrators to install website applications like MediaWiki. Mainly because most website applications are created with the homepage as index.php (for PHP applications).

</doc>
<doc id="359" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=359" title="Hair">
Hair

 Hair is something that grows from the skin of mammals. Animal hair is usually called fur. Sheep and goats have curly hair, which is usually called wool. Hair is made of keratin. Keratins are proteins.
Humans and some other animals have lost much of their hair through evolution, and some other mammals, such as the elephant and the whale, have almost none at all.
Functions of hair.
Hair can have different functions:
False hair.
Some animals, for example certain insects and spiders also have "hairs". However these are not hair in the biological sense, but are actually bristles. The "hairs" found on certain plants are also not true hair, but trichomes.
Human hair.
In humans, hair grows mostly on the head, and the amount of body hair is different from race to race. Asians and native North Americans have the least amount of body hair, while Caucasians tend to have the most.
Hair color.
Hair color is passed down by parents only. Natural hair color can be given only by genes. It is impossible to have a hair color that is not passed down genetically by both mother and father. This relies on dominant and recessive genes carried by a parent. These genes may not be the color of their hair, however, many people carry genes that are recessive and do not show in their traits or features.
Dyeing hair is to change the color of hair. It consists of a chemical mixture which can change the color of hair by a chemical reaction. Many people dye their hair to hide gray or white hairs. This is because most people gain white or gray hairs as they grow older.
Genetics and chemistry.
Two types of melanin pigment give hair its color: "eumelanin" and "pheomelanin". Pheomelanin colors hair red. Eumelanin determines the darkness of the hair color. A low concentration of brown eumelanin results in blond hair, but more brown eumelanin will color the hair brown. High amounts of black eumelanin result in black hair, while low concentrations give gray hair. All humans have some pheomelanin in their hair.
The genetics of hair colors are not yet firmly established. According to one theory, at least two gene pairs control human hair color.
One phenotype (brown/blond) has a dominant brown allele and a recessive blond allele. A person with a brown allele will have brown hair; a person with no brown alleles will be blond. This explains why two brown-haired parents can produce a blond-haired child.
The other gene pair is a non-red/red pair, where the not-red allele is dominant and the allele for red hair is recessive. A person with two copies of the red-haired allele will have red hair, but it will be either auburn or bright reddish orange depending on whether the first gene pair gives brown or blond hair, respectively.
The two-gene model does not account for all possible shades of brown, blond, or red (for example, platinum blond versus dark blonde/light brown), nor does it explain why hair color sometimes darkens as a person ages. Several other gene pairs control the light versus dark hair color in a cumulative effect (quantitative genetics).
Hair texture.
Hair texture is also inherited genetically. The thickness of hair, its color and its tendency to curl are all inherited. There are also genetic differences between men and women. Body hair is limited in women, and thicker in men.
Hair loss.
 People have about 100,000 hairs on their head. About 100 fall out each day, but they usually grow back. Some men are bald but girls and women may become bald if they lose their hair from a disease called Alopecia.
Men often lose some of their hair as they grow older. This is known as "baldness". Doctors call it "male pattern baldness" because hairs often fall out in similar places. It often begins by hair falling out first from the front of the head, and then from the top of the head. After a while, all that may be left is a some hair running above the ears and around the lower back of the head. Even though it is unusual for women to go bald, many women suffer from thinning hair over the top of their head as they grow old.
People have tried to find cures for hair loss for thousands of years. In an effort to get their hair back, men have tried "cures" like applying strange lotions or even having their heads packed in chicken manure. Many unproven "cures" are still marketed today. It is only in the last decade or so that treatments have been developed which do sometimes work. Some doctors do hair transplants, where they take tiny plugs of hair from areas like the back of the neck and plant them in the bald spots on the head. Some drugs have been tested and approved for sale as hair loss treatments. They encourage hair regrowth and thickening, but work better if applied before hair loss turns to baldness.
History and culture.
 People have been interested in hair on their heads for hundreds of thousands of years. For both men and women, styling and coloring hair have been ways to look good, and get attention. Sometimes society makes rules about hair, for example by not allowing people to cut their hair or beards, like in Sikhism (it is also good to do this in Islam, but not a requirement).

</doc>
<doc id="361" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=361" title="Ireland">
Ireland

This page is about the island of Ireland. For other uses, see Ireland (disambiguation).
Ireland is an island in Europe. To the west of Ireland is the Atlantic Ocean; to the east of Ireland, across the Irish Sea, is the island of Great Britain.
The island of Ireland is about 486 km (302 miles) long and about 288 km (179 miles) wide. About 6.4 million people live on the island – 4.6 million in the Republic of Ireland and 1.8 million in Northern Ireland.
The River Shannon, which runs from north to south, is the longest river on the island. Ireland has many lakes. Lough Neagh, in Northern Ireland, is the largest lake in Ireland. Ireland is known for its beautiful landscapes, music, history, and mythology.
Today, the island of Ireland is split between two countries:
Many people live in the eastern coasts of both the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland. Dublin has a population of more than one million, and the Greater Belfast region has a population of nearly half a million.
Provinces and counties.
Ireland is traditionally divided into four provinces and thirty-two counties. Twenty-six counties are in the Republic and six in Northern Ireland. Three of the provinces are entirely within the Republic (Connacht, Leinster and Munster), and one province (Ulster) has some counties in both the Republic and in Northern Ireland.
Main cities.
Dublin is the largest city. It is capital of the Republic of Ireland. Dublin was established as a Viking settlement in the 9th century. The population is 525,383 in Dublin City, and 1,270,603 in Co. Dublin. 
 
[]
Belfast is the capital of Northern Ireland. It has 483,000 people in the Greater Belfast urban area there are 267,000 in the city itself. 
 
[] Shipbuilding used to be a major industry here. The "Titanic" was built in Belfast at the Harland and Wolff shipyard.
Armagh is a city in Northern Ireland. It is often called the 'Ecclesiastic Capital of Ireland' as it is the seat of both the Catholic Church and the (Protestant) Church of Ireland. The population is 14,590. 
 
[]
Cork is the largest city in Munster. Corconians often jokingly refer to it as 'the Real Capital'. The population is 119,230. 
 
[]
Derry, also known as Londonderry, is the second largest city in Northern Ireland. Derry is notable for the Medieval city walls which still stand. Because the walls have never been breached, the city is nicknamed "The Maiden City". In 2013 Derry/Londonderry was the UK Capital of Culture. Many cultural events took place there during the year. The population is 83,652. 
 
[]
History.
During the last glacial period (the "ice age"), most of Ireland was covered with ice. After that, Ireland became covered with trees. The first people came to Ireland about 9,000 years ago, in the Middle Stone Age (Mesolithic period). They were nomadic. Once food ran out in the place they lived, they would move to another place. Evidence of these people was found in Mount Sandel, Co. Derry. 
About 4000 BC, in the New Stone Age (Neolithic period), the first farmers arrived in Ireland. These people cleared openings in the forest and built permanent settlements with houses and farmland. When people in this age died, they were buried in tombs called megaliths. Many megaliths are left standing today, such as portal dolmens and passage tombs. The most famous megalith is Newgrange passage tomb in co. Meath. 
New settlers came around 2000BC, marking the start of the Bronze Age. Copper was mined mainly in Mount Gabriel, co. Cork, and tin was imported from Cornwall. These people used bronze to make weapons, such as swords. They also used it to make early forms of jewellery, such as sun discs and torcs. These settlers buried the dead in court tombs or wedge tombs, and burial places have been found with stone circles. 
It is unknown when the Celts came to Ireland, but it is likely they brought the use of iron with them. The use of iron marks the start of the Iron Age. It is known that by about 300BC, the use of iron and Celtic culture was widespread in Ireland. The Celts lived in ring forts, hill forts, promontory forts and crannógs. It is thought that only the richer families and settlements lived in crannógs. These were man-made islands in the middle of lakes with houses on them. 
Celtic Ireland was split into around 150 kingdoms called tuath. The king was elected from the royal family. Below the king were the Nobles, and the Aos Dána, who were people with special skills, such as poets, Druids (priests), judges and craftsmen. 
By the early 6th century, Ireland was mostly Christian through the work of St. Patrick and other missionaries. Druids were replaced by priests and monks. Monasteries soon were built such as Glendalough in co. Wicklow. Glendalough and other monasteries built round towers for safety when Vikings attacked. Small monasteries were also built in remote places, the most famous being Skellig Michael, off the coast of co. Kerry. 
At this time many hand-written manuscripts were created by the monasteries. They include the Cathach, the Book of Durrow, and the Book of Kells. Monks also produced fine silver chalices, croziers and brooches, and carved high crosses. 
In 1169, Anglo-Norman lords invaded Ireland. They were led by Strongbow. He landed at Passage, Co. Waterford. The Anglo-Normans conquered many parts of Ireland the following 60 years. They introduced their way of life. The feudal system was soon introduced in Ireland as means of organising land. Castles were built to defend the land like Trim Castle, co. Meath. During the Middle Ages, Ireland's first proper towns were built. 
From 1801 until 1922, all of Ireland was part of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. In 1921 Northern Ireland was created and 'partitioned' from the south. Northern Ireland has stayed within the United Kingdom since then. The full name of the UK is 'The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland'.
In 1922 the south became the Irish Free State. In 1937 the Irish Free State adopted a new constitution which named the state 'Ireland', and in 1948 this state passed the Republic of Ireland Act which declared it to be a republic.
Migration.
Many Irish people have left Ireland and moved to the United States, Canada, Australia, and South America. The Great Famine in the 1840's forced many to leave; it is estimated almost a million people died of starvation, and a million more emigrated. From a maximum of over 8 million in 1841, the total Irish population dropped to just over 4 million in the 1940s. Since then, the population has grown to over 6 million. This has been helped by the economic growth of the "Celtic Tiger" and since 2004 immigration from countries in Eastern Europe such as Poland.
Today almost 80 million people around the world are descended from Irish immigrants.
Other websites.
 Media related to at Wikimedia Commons

</doc>
<doc id="362" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=362" title="Internet">
Internet

The Internet is a large group of computers that are connected to each other. The Internet is used to send information quickly between computers around the world. It has millions of smaller domestic, academic, business, and government networks and websites, which together carry many different kinds of information (facts and details) and services. So in other words, the Internet is a network of networks. 
History.
The Internet was developed in the United States by the "United States Department of Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency" (DARPA). It was first connected in October, 1969. The World Wide Web was created
at CERN in Switzerland in 1989 by a British (UK) man named Tim Berners-Lee.
Today, people can pay money to access the Internet from Internet Service Providers. Some services on the Internet cost nothing to use. Sometimes the people who offer these free services use advertising to make money from them.
The alternative (other) name, "Net" came from "Inter(net)".
Services on the Internet.
The Internet is used for many things, such as electronic mail, online chat, file transfer, and the interlinked web pages and other documents of the World Wide Web.
The most used service on the Internet is the World Wide Web (which is also called the "Web"). The Web contains websites, blogs, and also wikis like Wikipedia. Webpages on the internet can be seen and read by anyone (unless the page needs a password, or it is blocked).
The second major use of the Internet is to send and receive e-mail. E-mail is private and goes from one user to another. Instant messaging (such as AIM or ICQ) is similar to email, but allows two or more people to chat to each other much faster.
Some governments think the Internet is a bad thing, and block all or part of it. For example, the Chinese government thinks that Wikipedia is bad. Many times no one in China can read it or add to it. Some parents block parts of the Internet they think are bad for children to see. Well-known examples of the whole Internet being blocked are in North Korea and Myanmar. 
Dangers on the Internet.
The Internet can also be a dangerous place. Information that people put on the Internet is not always checked, and some may not be true. Some may even be harmful. Also, if someone sends information through the internet, sometimes other people can read it even when they are not supposed to. For example, Facebook has had some problems with privacy settings. A person can post information on a website, but this is often a bad idea unless the person is very sure of what they are doing. A good way to check for a secure website is to make sure the URL starts with https:// instead of http://, this means it is a secure site. (This only stops other people from reading what a user types. It does not mean the website is safe)

</doc>
<doc id="363" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=363" title="Italy">
Italy

Italy is a country in Europe and a member of the European Union. Its official name is Repubblica Italiana. Italy is a democratic republic and is a founding member of the European Union. and 70,000 Hindus in Italy.
Regions.
Italy is divided into 20 Regions ("Regioni" in Italian) and every Region is divided into Provinces.
There are 20 Regions. 5 of them have a special status, they are called "autonomous". This means that they can make certain local laws more easily. These regions are marked with an asterisk (*) below. 
Politics.
The Head of State is Sergio Mattarella, whose task began in February 2015. Mattarella is currently the President of the Italian Republic. The first president was Enrico De Nicola.
The Head of Government is Matteo Renzi, who became Prime Minister on February 22, 2014, succeeding Enrico Letta. Renzi was previously the Mayor of Florence and is Italy's youngest-ever Prime Minister, at age 39 when taking office.
Italy was one of the first members of the European Union and in 2002, along with 11 other European countries, it changed to using the euro as its official currency. Before this, the Italian lira had been used since 1861.
Anyone who wants to be President of Italy must have Italian citizenship, be at least 50 years old, and must be able to hold political and civil rights.
History.
Before 1861, Italy was not a state. The area was made of a group of independent states, ruled by other countries (such as Austria, France, and Spain). In the 1850s the Earl of Camillo Cavour was the Head of Government of the "State of Sardinia". He talked to the Austrians in Lombardy and Veneto and said they should create a Northern Italian state. This happened, but other Central and Southern Italian states also joined Piedmont to create a bigger state.
In 1860, Giuseppe Garibaldi took control of Sicily, creating the Kingdom of Italy in 1861. Vittorio Emanuele II was made the King. But, in 1861, Latium and Veneto were still not part of Italy, because they were ruled by the Pope and Austrian Empire.
Veneto was made part of Italy in 1866 after a war with Austria, and Italian soldiers won Latium in 1870. That was when they took away the Pope's power. The Pope, who was angry, said that he was a prisoner to keep Catholic people from being active in politics. That year, Italy finally came back together.
Italy participated in World War I as an ally of Great Britain, France, and Russia against the Central Powers. Almost all of Italy's fighting was on the Eastern border, near Austria. After the "Caporetto defeat", Italy thought they would lose the war. But, in 1918, the Central Powers surrendered, and Italy gained the Trentino-South Tyrol, which once was owned by Austria.
In 1922, a new Italian government started, and it was ruled by Benito Mussolini, the leader of Fascism in Italy. He became Head of Government and dictator, calling himself "duce" - which means "leader" in Italian. He became friends with German dictator Hitler, and Mussolini followed him into World War II. Italy entered the war in 1940 as an ally of Germany and Japan against France, Great Britain, and Russia. During the war, Italy controlled most of the Mediterranean Sea.
On July 25, 1943, Mussolini was removed by the Great Council of Fascism, and, on September 8, 1943, Badoglio said that the war as an ally of Germany was ended. Italy started fighting as an ally of France and the UK, but Italian soldiers did not know who to shoot. In Northern Italy, a movement called Resistenza started to fight against the German invaders.
Mussolini tried to make another Northern Italian fascist state, the Republic of Salò, but it failed. On April 25, 1945, Italy became free. The state became a republic on June 2, 1946, and, for the first time, women were able to vote. Italian people ended the Savoia dynasty and adopted a republic government.
In February 1947, Italy signed a peace treaty with the Allies losing all the colonies and some territorial areas (Istria and parts of Dalmatia).
Since then Italy has joined NATO and the European Community (as a founding member), becoming one of the seven biggest industrial economies in the world.
Transportation.
The railway network in Italy totals 16,627 kilometres (10,331 mi), the 17th longest in the world. High speed trains include ETR-class trains which travel at 300 km/h (190 mph).
Other websites.
italy is shaped like a boot
pompei was a city not far from rome (the capital city)was destroyed by a volcano

</doc>
<doc id="364" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=364" title="If">
If

 
 
If is a word to describe a statement where one thing depends on something else. 
For example:
If — is a poem written by Rudyard Kipling. It appeared in the "Brother Square Toes" chapter of Kipling's book "Rewards and Fairies". In a 1995 BBC opinion poll, it was voted Britain's favourite poem. It is arguably Kipling's most famous poem.

</doc>
<doc id="367" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=367" title="Island">
Island

An island is a piece of ground that is surrounded by a body of water such as a lake, river or sea. Water is all around an island. Islands are smaller than continents.
Arrange the following island in order of their sizes, the largest first.The largest island in the world is Greenland, unless Australia is believed to be an island. 
Some islands are their own countries. Examples of islands that are their own countries include Cuba, Iceland, and Madagascar. There are many others. Other islands have more than one country, such as Borneo and Hispaniola.

</doc>
<doc id="370" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=370" title="Interim">
Interim

Interim means "in between" or "transitional" (moving from one time or place to another), or "temporary."
Some common "interim" items:
Other examples;
 
 

</doc>
<doc id="371" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=371" title="Idiom">
Idiom

Template codice_1 has been incorrectly substituted.
An idiom is a word or phrase which means something different from its literal meaning. Idioms are common phrases or terms whose meaning is not real, but can be understood by their popular use.
Because idioms can mean something different from what the words mean it is difficult for someone not very good at speaking the language to use them properly. Some idioms are only used by some groups of people or at certain times. The idiom "shape up or ship out", which is like saying "improve your behavior or leave if you don't", might be said by an employer or supervisor to an employee, but not to other people.
Idioms are not the same thing as slang. Idioms are made of normal words that have a special meaning known by almost everyone. Slang is usually special words that are known only by a particular group of people.
To learn a language a person needs to learn the words in that language, and how and when to use them. But people also need to learn idioms separately because certain words together or at certain times can have different meanings. In order to understand an idiom, one sometimes needs to know the culture the idiom comes from.
To know the history of an idiom can be useful and interesting, but is not necessary to be able to use the idiom properly. For example, most native British English speakers know that "No room to swing a cat" means "there was not a lot of space" and can use the idiom properly, but few know it is because 200 years ago sailors were punished by being whipped with a whip called a "cat o'nine tails". A big space was cleared on the ship so that the person doing the whipping had a lot of room to "swing the cat".
A better understanding of an idiom is that it is a phrase whose meaning cannot be understood from the dictionary definitions of each word taken separately.

</doc>
<doc id="373" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=373" title="IELTS">
IELTS

The International English Language Testing System (IELTS) tests how good you are at the English language. People who take the test take the Academic Module or the General Training Module. The academic one is for people who want to go to university. The general one is for people who want to do other training or want to get work experience. People who want to emigrate to a country that uses English also take the general one.
Most universities in Australia, Britain, Canada, New Zealand and the United States accept the IELTS. Many professional companies do as well.

</doc>
<doc id="378" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=378" title="Ink">
Ink

Ink is a liquid that is used to write, draw, print, or make marks. The word ink is from Latin and means "colored water". Ink is used in pens, in some computer printers, and in printing presses. In some countries, people write by using ink and brushes. People usually write or print using black ink, but ink can be any color. The first ink was used in Egypt about 2600 BC.
A disadvantage of many kinds of ink is that they may smudge when wet, spoiling the picture or writing. 
The first inks were carbon inks, made from soot, which is 80% carbon, water and gum arabic. Red ink would need iron oxide (such as haematite) from ground rocks instead of soot. Later, in Europe, people used iron gall ink. This is the kind of ink Johann Sebastian Bach and Leonardo da Vinci used. Now ink colours are produced by dyes.
Ink in a ball point pen is held in a thin long cylinder (tube) inside the pen. The ink does not fall out of the cylinder as it sticks to the sides of the tube.
References.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="381" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=381" title="Inch">
Inch

The inch is a unit of length in the Imperial system and the United States customary system. The abbreviation for inches is in or ". There are 12 inches in a foot. One inch is equal to 2.54 centimetres.
The word "inch" came from Middle English "unche", which came from Old English "ynce", from Latin "uncia" meaning "a twelfth part".
History.
The inch was originally defined as 3 barleycorns. The inch was finally standardised in the International Yard and Pound Treaty in 1959 between the United States, the United Kingdom, South Africa, Australia, New Zealand and Canada. The international yard was made equal to 0.9144 metres. From this, subdivisions and multiples of the yard were specifically defined.
Usage.
In the United States, people use inches more than they use millimetres or centimetres. In the rest of the world, international units are almost always used. The inch is not used by scientists.
In the United Kingdom, road signs that show how high a vehicle can be in order to pass through a tunnel are required to be in feet and inches. Theme parks and drive thru signs usually show it in metres. People regularly measure their height in feet and inches. Official medical records, however, are required to record people's height in metric measurements only.
In Canada, a mix of centimetres and inches are used in height. Older generations, especially, use Imperial units. A lot of exposure to Americanized phrases leads to younger generations often having a good understanding of both the Imperial and metric systems.
In the United States, height is always in feet and inches. Science is the only field to use metric measurements.
Other Commonwealth countries, including Ireland, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa and Jamaica use inches to varying degrees. From every day use to exclusively the older community.

</doc>
<doc id="384" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=384" title="Pint">
Pint

The pint (abbreviated pt.) is a unit of volume in Imperial and U.S. units. There are several types of pints used in different countries. An Imperial pint and U.S. pint both equal of a quart and of a gallon.
An Imperial fluid ounce is approx. 4% smaller than a U.S. fluid ounce although an Imperial pint has 4 more fluid ounces than a U.S. pint making 1 Imperial Pint roughly 20% larger than a U.S. pint in total.
Imperial Pint.
The Imperial pint is the pint used in the United Kingdom, Canada, Ireland and Burma. The unit may appear in other Commonwealth countries that converted to the Metric System. Confusion in Canada often arises as liquids are often sold in U.S. pints although the official and only pint that is legal in Canada is the Imperial pint. The Imperial system has no dry pint and volume in dry units e.g. apples are the same as liquid pints. 1 Imperial pint of water at 62 °F (16.7 °C) weighs 1 lbs. (566.99 g)
U.S. Wet Pint.
The U.S. wet pint or more commonly 'pint' is the unit used to measure volume in the United States. It is more common than the dry pint which is used for non-liquid volume measurements. 1 U.S. pint of water at 62 °F (16.7 °C) weighs 1.04375 pounds lbs. (473.437g)
U.S. Dry Pint.
The U.S. dry pint is the unit used for measuring the volume of solid objects instead of by mass or quantity. E.g. a pint of strawberries is a container with a volume of 1 dry pint full of strawberries. 

</doc>
<doc id="387" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=387" title="Italian">
Italian

The word Italian may mean:
 
 

</doc>
<doc id="390" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=390" title="ISO 19011">
ISO 19011

Template codice_1 has been incorrectly substituted.
ISO 19011 is the new global accounting standard, replacing accounting standards that were part of ISO 14001 and ISO 9001. It is the most likely basis for accounting reform which could put an end to accounting scandals.
 "This can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".</div >

</doc>
<doc id="391" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=391" title="India">
India

The Republic of India (Hindi: भारत गणराज्य) is a country in Asia. It is at the center of South Asia. India has more than 1.2 billion (1,210,000,000) people, which is the second largest population in the world. It is the seventh largest country in the world by area.
India has seven neighbours: Pakistan in the north-west, China and Nepal in the north, Bhutan and Bangladesh in the north-east, Myanmar in the east and Sri Lanka, an island, in the south.
India is the largest democracy in the world by population. The capital of India is New Delhi. India is a peninsula, bound by the Indian Ocean in the south, the Arabian Sea on the west and Bay of Bengal in the east. The coastline of India is of about 7517 km long. India has the third largest army in the world and nuclear weapons.
India gets its name from the Greek word, Indus. It means "the people who live near the Indus River."
India is a growing economy, regarded as the fastest growing country in the world along with China. In terms of Literacy and wealth, India has done a good job. Although it's regarded as the 83rd most corrupt nation out of 174 most recognized countries, as per Corruption Perceptions Index, Indian government has faced thousands of protests since April 2011, where people have demanded many major politicians to resign, and give up all the money which they have earned through corruption.
India is a founding member of the World Trade Organisation (WTO), and has signed the Kyoto Protocol.
India has the largest number of spoken languages per country in the world. 
Many people of different religions live there.
National Symbols of India.
The National emblem of India shows four lions standing back-to-back. The lions symbolise power, pride, confidence, and courage (bravery). Only the government can use this emblem, according to the 
History
History.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : History of India
Two of the main Classical languages of the world— Sanskrit and Tamil, were born in India. Both of these languages are more than 3000 years old. The country founded a religion called Hinduism, which most Indians still follow. Later, a king called Ashoka built an empire called the Maurya dynasty in 300 BC. It made most of South Asia into one whole country. From 180 BC, many other countries invaded India. Even later (100 BC  — AD 1100), other Indian dynasties (empires) came, including the Chalukyas, Cholas, Pallavas, and Pandyas. South India at that time was famous for its very good science, art, and writing.
Many dynasties ruled India around the year 1000. Some of these were the Mughal, Vijayanagara, and the Maratha empires. In the 1600s, European countries invaded India, and the British controlled most of India by 1856.
In the early 1900s, millions of people peacefully started to protest. One of the people who were leading the freedom movement was Mahatma Gandhi, who only used peaceful tactics, including a way called "ahinsa", which means "non-violence". On 15 August 1947, India peacefully became free and independent from the British Empire. India's constitution was founded on 26 January 1950. Every year, on this day, Indians celebrate Republic Day. The first official leader (Prime Minister) of India was Jawaharlal Nehru.
After 1947, India has had a socialist planned economy. It is one founding member of the Non-Aligned Movement and the United Nations. It has fought many wars since independence from Britain, including in 1947-48, 1965, 1971, and 1999 with Pakistan and in 1962 with China. It also fought a war to capture Goa, a Portuguese-built port and city which was not a part of India until 1961. The Portuguese refused to give it to the country, and so India had to use force and the Portuguese were defeated. India has also done nuclear tests in 1974 and 1998, and it is one of the few countries that has nuclear bombs. Since 1991, India has been one of the fastest-growing economies in the world.
The first in India 
Government.
India is the largest democracy in the world.
India's government is divided into three parts: the Legislative (the one that makes the laws, the Parliament), the Executive (the government), and the Judiciary (the one that makes sure that the laws are obeyed, the supreme court).
The legislative branch is made up of the Parliament of India, which is in New Delhi, the capital of India. The Parliament of India is divided into two groups: the upper house, Rajya Sabha (Council of States); and the lower house, Lok Sabha (House of People). The Rajya Sabha has 250 members, and the Lok Sabha has 552 members.
The executive branch is made up of the President, Vice President, Prime Minister, and the Council of Ministers. The President of India is elected for five years. The President can choose the Prime Minister, who has most of the power. The Council of Ministers, such as the Minister of Defence, help the Prime Minister. Narendra Modi became the Prime Minister of India on May 16, 2014. He is the 19th Prime Minister of India.
The judicial branch is made up of the courts of India, including the Supreme Court. The Chief Justice of India is the head of the Supreme Court. Supreme Court members have the power to stop a law being passed by Parliament if they think that the law is illegal and contradicts (opposes) the Constitution of India. In India, there are also 21 High Courts.
Geography and climate.
India is the seventh largest country in the world. It is the main part of the Indian subcontinent. The countries next to India are Pakistan, Bangladesh, Myanmar, China, Bhutan, and Nepal. It is also near Sri Lanka, an island country.
India is a peninsula, which means that it is surrounded on three sides by water. One of the seven wonders of the world is located in Agra the Taj Mahal. In the west is the Arabian Sea, in the south is the Indian Ocean, and in the east is the Bay of Bengal. The northern part of India has many mountains. The most famous mountain range in India is the Himalayas, which have some of the tallest mountains in the world. There are many rivers in India. The main rivers are the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, the Yamuna, the Godavari, the Kaveri, the Narmada, and the Krishna.
India has different climates. In the South, the climate is mainly tropical, which means it can get very hot in summer and cool in winter. The northern part, though, has a cooler climate, called sub-tropical, and even alpine in mountainous regions. The Himalayas, in the alpine climate region, can get extremely cold. There is very heavy rainfall along the west coast and in the Eastern Himalayan foothills. The west, though, is drier. Because of some of the deserts of India, all of India gets rain for four months of the year. That time is called the monsoon. That is because the deserts attract water-filled winds from the Indian Ocean, which give rain when they come into India. When the monsoon rains come late or not so heavily, droughts (when the land dries out because there is less rain) are possible.
Defence.
The Indian Armed Forces are the military of India. It is made up of an Army, Navy Coast Guard and Air Force. There are other parts like Paramilitary and Strategic Nuclear Command.
The President of India is its Commander-in-Chief. However, it is managed by the Ministry of Defence. In 2010, the Indian Armed Forces had 1.32 million active personnel. This makes it one of the largest militaries in the world.[1]
Currently,the Indian Army is becoming more modern by buying and making new weapons. It is also building defences against missiles of other countries.[2] In 2011, India imported more weapons than any other nation in the world.[3]
From its independence in 1947, India fought four wars with Pakistan and one war with China.
India's Gurkha soldiers are famous around the world for their bravery.
Indian states.
For administration purposes, India has been divided into smaller pieces. Most of these pieces are called states, some are called union territories. States and union territories are different in the way they are represented. Most union territories are ruled by administrators sent by the central government. All the states, and the territories of Dehli, and Puducherry elect their local government themselves. In total, there are twenty-nine states, and seven union territories.
States:
Union territories:
Trouble with the borders.
There are disputes about certain parts of the Indian borders. Countries do not agree on where the borders are. Pakistan and China do not recognise the disputed territory of Occupied Kashmir. The Indian government calls it "Jammu and Kashmir" and believes it is an Indian state. Similarly, the Republic of India does not recognise the Pakistani and Chinese parts of Kashmir.
In 1914, British India and Tibet agreed on the McMahon Line, as part of the Simla Accord. Indians and Tibetans see this line as the official border. China does not agree, and both mainland China and Taiwan do not recognize that Arunachal Pradesh belongs to India. According to them, it is a part of South Tibet, which belongs to China.
Economy.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : Economy of India
The economy of the country is among world's fastest growing. The economy of India is the 3rd largest in the world with a GDP of $4798 billion. In terms of PPP, the economy is 3rd largest (worth $4.798 trillion U.S.). The growth rate is 8.25% for fiscal 2010. However, that is still $3678 (considering PPP) per person per year. India's economy is based mainly on service sector=43%, Industries=41%, I.T=7%, farming=7%, Outsourcing=2%.
India's economy is diverse. Major industries include automobiles, cement, chemicals, consumer electronics, food processing, machinery, mining, petroleum, pharmaceuticals, steel, transportation equipment, and textiles.
However, despite economic growth, India suffers from poverty. 27.5% of the population was living in poverty in 2004–2005. In addition, 80.4% of the population live on less than USD $2 a day, which was lowered to 68% by 2009.
People.
There are 1.12 billion people living in India. India is the second largest country by the number of people living in it, with China being the first. Experts think that by the year 2030, India will be the first. About 70% of Indians live on farms. The largest cities in India are Mumbai, Kolkata, Delhi, Chennai, Bangalore, Hyderabad, and Ahmedabad. India has 23 official languages. Altogether, 1.625 languages are spoken in India.
Languages.
There are many different languages and cultures in India. The only geographical place with more different languages and cultures is the African continent. There are two main language families in India, the Indo-Aryan and the Dravidian languages. About 69% of Indians speak an Indo-Arayan language, about 26% speak a Dravidian language. Other languages spoken in India come from the Austro-Asiatic group. Around 5% of the people speak a Tibeto-Burman language.
Hindi is the official language in India with the largest number of speakers. It is the official language of the union. Native speakers of Hindi represent about 41% of the Indian population (2001 Indian census). English is also used, mostly for business and in the administration. 
It has the status of a 'subsidiary official language'. The constitution also recognises 21 other languages. Either many people speak those languages, or they have been recognised to be very important for Indian culture. The number of dialects in India is as high as 1,652.
In the south of India, many people speak Kannada, Telugu, Tamil and Malayalam. In the north, many people speak Chhattisgarhi, Punjabi, Bengali, Gujarati, and Marathi, Oriya, and Bihari.
India has 23 official languages. Its constitution lists the name of the country in each of the languages. Hindi and English (listed in boldface) are the "official languages of the union" (Union meaning the Federal Government in Delhi); Tamil and Sanskrit kannada are officially the "classical languages of India."
Culture.
Cave paintings from the Stone Age are found across India. They show dances and rituals and suggest there was a prehistoric religion.
During the Epic and Puranic periods, the earliest versions of the epic poems "Ramayana" and "Mahabharata" were written from about 500–100 BCE, although these were [ orally] transmitted for centuries before this period. Other South Asian Stone Age sites apart from Pakistan are in modern India, such as the Bhimbetka rock shelters in central Madhya Pradesh and the Kupgal petroglyphs of eastern Karnataka, contain rock art showing religious rites and evidence of possible [ ritualised] music.
Several modern religions are linked to India, namely modern Hinduism, Jainism, Buddhism and Sikhism. All of these religions have different "schools" (ways of thinking) and traditions that are related. As a group they are called the Eastern religions. The Indian religions are similar to one another in many ways: The basic beliefs, the way worship is done and several religious practices are very similar. These similarities mainly come from the fact that these religions have a common history and common origins. They also influenced each other.
The religion of Hinduism is the main faith followed by 79.80% of people in the Republic of India; Islam – 14.23%; Christianity – 2.30%; Sikhism – 1.72%; Buddhism – 0.70% and Jainism – 0.37%.
It's the first time ever since independence that hindu population percentage fell below 80%.
Technology.
India has sent a space shuttle to Mars for the first time in 2014. It was called the Mars Orbiter Mission. It took lesser money compared to the Hollywood movie, Gravity.
Sports.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : Sports in India
India's official national sport is field hockey which is controlled by the Indian Hockey Federation. The Indian field hockey team won the 1975 Men's Hockey World Cup. They have also won eight gold, one silver and two bronze medals at the Olympic games. However, cricket is the most popular sport in India. The India cricket team won the 1983 and 2011 Cricket World Cup and the 2007 ICC World Twenty20. They shared the 2002 ICC Champions Trophy with Sri Lanka. Cricket in India is controlled by the Board of Control for Cricket in India or BCCI. Domestic tournaments are the Ranji Trophy, the Duleep Trophy, the Deodhar Trophy, the Irani Trophy and the Challenger Series. There is also the Indian cricket league and Indian premier league Twenty20 competitions.
Tennis has become popular due to the victories of the India Davis Cup team. Association football is also a popular sport in northeast India, West Bengal, Goa and Kerala. The Indian national football team has won the South Asian Football Federation Cup many times. Chess, which comes from India, is also becoming popular. This is with the increase in the number of Indian Grandmasters. Traditional sports include kabaddi, kho kho, and gilli-danda, which are played throughout India.
Other websites.
 Find more information on India by searching one of Wikipedia's :
 Dictionary definitions from Wiktionary<br>
 from Wikibooks<br>
 from Wikiquote<br>
 from Wikisource<br>
 from Commons<br>
 from Wikinews<br>
 from Wikiversity<br>
 from Wikispecies<br>
 from Wikidata<br>
 from MediaWiki
<indicator name="top-icon"></indicator>

</doc>
<doc id="393" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=393" title="Insult">
Insult

An insult is a description of someone that will offend them. It may or may not be true. It is called "derogatory" language. Terms like foolish, stupid, idiot and moron are insults, because they say that a person's mind is not quick or smart.
Insulting someone's mother directly is a serious insult in many cultures.
Ritual insults are part of many cultures. For example, they can be found in sports and military training. They are also very common in jargons. For example, the word "newbie" is a part of net jargon. Calling someone a newbie is usually insulting.
One should be very careful when using new words to describe others.
Reason.
Usually, someone insults others because they want to feel like they are better or have more power (influence) than the people they insult. They may want this because they are actually afraid that they are worse or less powerful than the people they are insulting.
Effects.
When someone is insulted, his or her pride is hurt. He or she may want to fight back by insulting the person who insulted him or her.

</doc>
<doc id="394" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=394" title="Immunology">
Immunology

Immunology is the study of the immune system. The immune system is the parts of the body which work against infection and parasitism by other living things. Immunology deals with the working of the immune system in health and diseases, and with malfunctions of the immune system.
An immune system is present in all plants and animals. We know this because biologists have found genes coding for toll-like receptors in many different metazoans. These toll-like receptors can recognise bacteria as 'foreign', and are the starting-point for immune reactions. The type of immunity which is triggered by the toll-like receptors is called innate immunity. This is because it is entirely inherited in our genome, and is fully working as soon as our tissues and organs are properly developed. 
Vertebrates, "and only vertebrates", have a second type of immunity. This is called adaptive immunity, because it 'remembers' previous infections. Then, if the same infection occurs again, the reaction is much stronger and faster. This immunological memory "confers a tremendous survival advantage" and with it vertebrates "can survive over a long lifetime in a pathogen-filled environment".
Types of immunity in vertebrates.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : Immune system
Innate immune response.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : Innate immune system
The innate immune system is usually means all of the cells and systems that does not have to be exposed to a particular pathogen before they can work. 
Innate immunity starts with the skin, which is an excellent barrier to infection.
Adaptive immune response.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : Adaptive immune system
The adaptive immune system includes cells and systems that do require previous exposure to a pathogen. It explains the unique ability of the mammalian immune system to remember previous infections and mount a rapid and robust reaction to secondary infections. This immunological memory is due to the biology of T-cells and B-cells.
Other aspects of immunity.
Vaccines boost the acquired immune system by offering weak forms of infection that the body can fight off. The system remembers how to do it again when a stronger infection happens. If the vaccine works, the body can then fight off a serious infection.
The distribution of vaccines and other immune system affecting cures can be considered another level of acquired immune system, one governed by access to vaccination and medicine in general. The intersection of this with the spread of disease (as studied in epidemiology) is part of the field of public health.
Errors and weaknesses.
Errors of the immune system may cause damage. In autoimmune diseases, the body attacks parts of itself because the system mistakes some parts of the body as 'foreign'. Some kinds of arthritis are caused this way.
Sometimes serious pathogens slip in because their surface is disguised as something the host cell walls can accept. That is how viruses work. Once inside a cell, their genetic material controls the cell. Infections like HIV get in this way, and then attack cells which are the basis of the immune system. Artificial means are often used to restore immune system function in an HIV-challenged body, and prevent the onset of AIDS. This is one of the most complex issues in immunology as it involves every level of that system. This research during the 1980s and 1990s radically changed the view of the human immune system and its functions and integration in the human body.
History of immunology.
Immunology is a science that examines the structure and function of the immune system. It originates from medicine and early studies on the causes of immunity to disease. The earliest known mention of immunity was during the plague of Athens in 430 BC. Thucydides (460–395 BC) noted that people who had recovered from a previous bout of some diseases could nurse the sick without contracting the illness a second time.
In the 18th century, Pierre-Louis Moreau de Maupertuis made experiments with scorpion venom and observed that certain dogs and mice were immune to this venom. This and other observations of acquired immunity led to Louis Pasteur (1822–1895) developing vaccination and the germ theory of disease. Pasteur's theory was in direct opposition to contemporary theories of disease, such as the miasma theory. It was not until the proofs Robert Koch (1843–1910) published in 1891 (for which he was awarded a Nobel Prize in 1905) that microorganisms were confirmed as the cause of infectious disease. Viruses were confirmed as human pathogens in 1901, when the yellow fever virus was discovered by Walter Reed (1851–1902).
Immunology made a great advance towards the end of the 19th century, through rapid developments, in the study of humoral immunity and cellular immunity. Particularly important was the work of Paul Ehrlich (1854–1915), who proposed the side-chain theory to explain the specificity of the antigen-antibody reaction. The Nobel Prize for 1908 was jointly awarded to Ehrlich and the founder of cellular immunology, Ilya Mechnikov (1845–1916).
The simplest form of immunity is the DNA restriction system in bacteria that prevents infection by bacteriophages.

</doc>
<doc id="395" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=395" title="Infinity">
Infinity

Infinity is about things which never end. Sometimes, it is also written formula_1. Infinity means many different things, depending on when it is used. The word is from a Latin word, which means "without end". Infinity goes on forever, so sometimes space, numbers, and other things are said to be 'infinite', because they never come to a stop.
Infinity is not really an ordinary number, but it is sometimes used as one. Infinity often says how "many" there is of something, instead of how "big" something is. For example, there are infinitely many whole numbers (called integers), but there is no integer which is infinitely big. But different kinds of math have different kinds of infinity. So its meaning often changes.
There are two kinds of infinity: potential infinity and actual infinity. Potential infinity is a process that never stops. For example, adding 10 to a number. No matter how many times 10 is added, 10 more can still be added. Actual infinity is a more abstract idea. For example, there are infinitely many numbers as it is impossible to write them all down.
Infinity in Mathematics.
Mathematicians have different sizes of infinity and three different kinds of infinity.
Counting infinity.
The number of things, beginning with 0, 1, 2, 3, ..., to include infinite cardinal numbers. There are many different cardinal numbers. Infinity can be defined in one of two ways: Infinity is a number so big that a part of it can be of the same size; Infinity is larger than all of the natural numbers. There is a smallest infinite number, "countable infinity". It is the counting number for all of the whole numbers. It is also the counting number of the rational numbers. The mathematical notation is the Hebrew letter aleph with a subscrpt zero; formula_2. It is spoken "aleph null". 
It was a surprise to learn that there are larger infinite numbers. The number of real numbers, that is all numbers with decimals, is larger than the number of rational numbers, the number of fractions. This shows that there are real numbers which are not fractions. The smallest infinite number greater than formula_2 is formula_4. 
The number of mathematical functions is the next infinite cardinal number, formula_5.
And these numbers go on without end.
Ordering infinity.
A different "type" of infinity are the ordinal numbers, beginning "first, second, third, ...". The order "first, second, third, ..." and so on to infinity is "different" from the order "ending" "..., third, second, first". The difference is important for mathematical induction. The simple "first, second, third, ... " has the mathematical name: the Greek letter omega with subscript zero: formula_6. (Or simply omega formula_7.) The infinite series ending "... third, second, first" is formula_8.
The real line and complex plane.
The third "type" of infinity has the symbol formula_1. This is treated as addition to the real numbers or the complex numbers. It is the result of division by zero, or to indicate that a series is increasing (or decreasing) without bound. The series 1, 2, 3, ... increases without upper bound. This is written: the limit is formula_10. In calculus, the integral over all real numbers is written: formula_11
The arithmetic of infinity.
Each kind of infinity has different rules.
Addition, multiplication, exponentiation.
formula_12 Addition with "alephs" is commutative.
formula_13 Multiplication with "alephs" is commutative.
formula_14
formula_15.
formula_16. Addition with "omegas" is not commutative.
formula_17. Multiplication with "omegas" is not commutative.
formula_18
formula_19
Subtraction, division.
formula_20 Otherwise, division by infinity is not meaningful. Subtraction with infinity is not meaningful.
Other websites.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="400" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=400" title="January">
January

January is the first month of the year in the Julian and Gregorian calendars, coming between December (of the previous year) and February (of the current year). It has 31 days. 
The Month.
January is named for Janus, the Roman god of doors and gates.
January and February were put on the calendar after all the other months. This is because in the original Roman calendar, winter did not have months. Although March was originally the first month, January became the new first month because that was when people chose the new consuls (Roman leaders).
January is a winter month in the Northern Hemisphere and a summer month in the Southern Hemisphere. In each hemisphere, it is the seasonal equivalent of July in the other. Perihelion, the point in its orbit where the Earth is closest to the Sun, also occurs in this month, between January 2 and January 5. January has 31 days and starts on the same day of the week as October in common years and the same day as April and July in leap years. It ends on the same day of the week as February and October in common years, and ends on the same day as July in leap years. January is the only month of the year that always has a "twin" - a month that starts and ends on the same day of the week as it does. In a common year, this is October. In a leap year, this is July.
January's flower is the carnation with its birthstone being the garnet. The meaning of the garnet is constancy.
The first day of January is called New Year's Day. It is said that it became this date when Roman consuls took office on this day in 153 BC. Different calendars across Europe made this the start of the New Year at different times, as some observed it on March 25.
Reaching over from December, the Christmas season in Christianity also extends into this month. Eastern churches celebrate Christmas on January 6 or January 7, and Epiphany on January 18 or January 19 - In Western Christianity this occurs on January 6, with Christmas occurring on December 25.

</doc>
<doc id="401" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=401" title="June">
June

June is the sixth month of the year. It has 30 days. June is named for the Roman goddess Juno, the wife of Jupiter. She is goddess of marriage. Because of this, getting married in June was thought to be lucky. June begins on a different day of the week each year.
June's flower is the Rose. Its birthstone is the pearl. The meaning for the birthstone pearl is health.
Events in June.
 "This can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".</div >

</doc>
<doc id="402" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=402" title="July">
July

July is the seventh month of the year in the Gregorian calendar, coming between June and August. It has 31 days. July was named after Julius Caesar. The month begins on the same day of the week as April every year and also January in leap years. The mid-way point of the year is either on July 2 or in the night of July 1-2.
The Month.
In each hemisphere, it is the seasonal equivalent of January in the other hemisphere. In the North, it is summer and in the South it is winter.
In the Northern Hemisphere, July is often the warmest month of the year, and major sporting events and music festivals are held around this time. In the Southern Hemisphere, it is a winter month, with the coldest-recorded temperature having been measured in Antarctica in this month.
July begins on the same day of the week as April in common years and also January in leap years. It ends on the same day of week as January in leap years, while in common years, no month ends on the same day of the week as July.
July's flower is a variety of the water lily. Its birthstone is the ruby. The meaning for the birthstone ruby is contented mind. Astrological signs for July are Cancer (June 22 - July 23) and Leo (July 24 - August 22).
In the old Roman calendar, July was called "Quintilis", meaning "Fifth Month" because, in the old calendar, the year began in March. Augustus later renamed it July in honour of Julius Caesar, whose birthday was in this month. Augustus later also named the following month, August, after himself.

</doc>
<doc id="403" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=403" title="Japan">
Japan

Japan (日本, Nippon) is a country in Asia. It has many islands. Four of them are big, and the biggest is the 7th largest island in the world. This island is called Honshu. The islands are near the east Asian coast, in the western part of the Pacific Ocean.
Japanese people call their country "Nihon" or "Nippon", which means "the origin of the Sun" in Japanese. Japan has a Prime minister and an Emperor and Empress. About 13 million people live in Tokyo which is the capital city of Japan.
History.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : History of Japan
The earliest records on Japan are from Chinese documents. One of those records said there were many small countries (in Japan) which had wars between them and later a country, ruled by a queen, became the strongest, unified others and peace came.
The Japanese began to write their own history after the 5th and 6th centuries, when people from Korea and China taught Japan about the Chinese writing system. Japan's neighbours also showed them the ways of Buddhism. The Japanese changed Buddhism in many ways, for example, by building strongly on ideas such as Zen, which came from mainland Asia.
In the ancient and the Middle Ages, China gave Japan many new cultural ideas, but their friendship became weaker later. In the late 13th century, Mongolians from China tried to invade Japan twice, but they could not.
The samurai and shogun of Medieval Japan are similar to knights and lords in Medieval Europe.
Japan had some contact with the Europeans in the 16th century. The Portuguese were the first Europeans to visit Japan. Later, the Spanish, English and Dutch came to Japan to trade. Also, they brought Christianity. Japan's leaders welcomed them at first, but because Europeans had conquered many places in the world, the Japanese were scared they would conquer Japan too. So the Japanese did not let the Europeans come into Japan anymore, except in a small area in Nagasaki city. Many Christians were killed. Only Chinese, Korean and Dutch people were allowed to visit Japan, in the end, and they were under careful control of the Japanese government. Japan was opened for visitors again in 1854 by Commodore Matthew Perry, when the Americans wanted to use Japanese ports for American whale boats. Perry brought steamships with guns, which scared the Japanese into making an agreement with him.
This new contact with Europeans and Americans changed the Japanese culture. The Meiji Restoration of 1868 stopped some old ways and added many new ones. The Empire of Japan was created, and it became a very powerful nation and tried to invade the countries next to it. It invaded and annexed Ryukyu Kingdom, Taiwan, and Korea. It had wars with China and Russia: the First Sino-Japanese War, the Boxer Rebellion the Russo-Japanese War, and the Second Sino-Japanese War, which grew to become a part of World War II.
In 1941, Japan hit Pearl Harbor in Hawaii, a water base of the United States and destroyed or damaged many ships and airplanes. This started the United States' involvement in World War II. American and Japanese forces fought each other in the Pacific. Once airbases were established within range of the Japanese mainland America began to win, and started dropping bombs on Japanese cities. America was able to bomb most of the important cities and quickly brought Japan close to defeat. To make Japan surrender, the United States dropped two atomic bombs on the cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, killing 150,000 Japanese citizens. Soon after this the Soviet Union began to fight against Japan and the Japanese army in Manchuria lost. Japan surrendered and gave up all the places it took from other countries, accepting the Potsdam Proclamation. The United States occupied Japan and forced it to write a new constitution, in which it promised to never go to war again.
Geography.
Japan is a group of islands in the Western Pacific, off the coast of China. The four biggest islands are Honshu, Hokkaido, Shikoku, and Kyushu, and there are about 6,000 smaller islands there. Japan is separated from the Asian continent by the Sea of Japan and the East China Sea. Honshu, which means 'Mainland' in the Japanese language, is the biggest island. Hokkaido is the island north of Honshu. Kyushu is the island west of Honshu. Shikoku is the island to the south-west of Honshu.
In the middle of Japan there are mountains. They cover the middle of the islands and leave a very narrow strip of flat land on most coasts. Many of the mountains are extinct volcanoes, but some are still active. The highest of these mountains is the beautiful, volcano-shaped Mt Fuji (3776m or 12,389 feet high). Japan has many earthquakes, in fact there are about 1500 of these every year. The most recent big earthquake was in 2011 - called '2011 Tohoku Earthquake'. It caused great damage to several power plants forcing Japan to shut down all its nuclear plants. There was nuclear core meltdown which caused a serious health risk to nearby villages and cities.
90% of the people living in Japan live in just 10% of the land, near the coast. The other 10% of the people in Japan live away from the coast.
Over 10 cities have more than a million people in them. The biggest city in Japan is Tokyo, which is the capital.
Politics and Government.
For more details, see Government of Japan
The ruling party is the Liberal Democratic Party (Japan) and prime minister is Shinzo Abe.
Science and technology.
In the past, much science in Japan was learnt either from China, or from Europe in the Meiji Era. However, in recent decades Japan has been a leading innovator in several fields, including chemical engineering, nanotechnology and robotics. There are many technological companies in Japan, and these companies make products for export.
The robot Asimo was made and introduced in 2000. It was manufactured by Honda.
Society and culture.
Many things in Japanese culture originated in China, for example Go, and bonsai.
Japan's traditional food is seafood, rice, miso soup, and vegetables. Noodles and tofu are also common. Sushi, a Japanese food made of cooked rice with vinegar with other ingredients such as raw fish, is popular around the world.
The religion in Japan is mostly Shinto and Buddhist. There are small numbers of Christians and Muslims, and a few Jews.
Armed forces.
For more details, see Imperial Japanese Army
Education.
For more details, see List of national universities in Japan
Cities.
The biggest cities in Japan are:
In Japan there are eight traditional regions:
Territorial problem.
Japan has 4 problems about territory. It cannot agree with some neighbouring countries on whether the land belongs to Japan or the other country. 
Public transportation.
There are several important international airports in Japan. Narita is the major international airport in the Tokyo area. Kansai International Airport serves as the main airport for Osaka, Kobe, and Kyoto. Chūbu Centrair International Airport near Nagoya is the newest of the three. Haneda Airport is close to central Tokyo and is the largest domestic airport in the country.
The Shinkansen is one of the fastest trains in the world and connects cities in Honshu and Kyushu. Networks of public and private railways are almost all over the country. People mostly travel between cities in buses.
Subdivisions.
Modern Japan is divided into 47 prefectures. Before the Meiji period (1868-1912), the nation was divided into provinces which were consolidated in the prefectural system.
Sports.
Japan has many traditional sports such as sumo, judo, karate, taido and kendo. Also, there are sports which were imported from the West such as baseball, soccer, golf and skiing.
Japan has taken part in the Olympic Games since 1912. It hosted the Olympic Games in 1964, 1972 and 1998. From 1912 until now, Japanese sports people have won 398 medals in total.
Other websites.
 Find more information on Japan by searching one of Wikipedia's :
 Dictionary definitions from Wiktionary<br>
 from Wikibooks<br>
 from Wikiquote<br>
 from Wikisource<br>
 from Commons<br>
 from Wikinews<br>
 from Wikiversity<br>
 from Wikispecies<br>
 from Wikidata<br>
 from MediaWiki

</doc>
<doc id="404" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=404" title="Jargon">
Jargon

Jargon is a special way to use words that are shared only by a certain group of people. They do not mean what the dictionary says they mean. They have different meanings to the people using them than their everyday meaning.
For example, the ordinary words "boot", "net", and "web" also have special meanings for users of computers, the Internet, and the World Wide Web. These, and to flame, to ping and many acronyms are part of net jargon.
An "acronym" means that only some of the letters in the word or phrase are used. Often this is the first letter of each word. Other acronyms found online are simply common shorthand. See list of slang words.
Usually, more jargon is created over time.
Jargon is also common in the military. It includes phrases like SNAFU.
Jargon can be used by a clique to prevent others from joining or understanding, but it also is often just used because it is shorter.

</doc>
<doc id="408" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=408" title="Jupiter">
Jupiter

For other uses, see Jupiter (disambiguation).
Jupiter is the largest planet in the Solar System. It is the fifth planet from the Sun. Jupiter is classified as a gas giant, both because it is so large and due to the fact that it is made up mostly of gas. The other gas giants are Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune. 
Jupiter has a mass of 1.8986×1027 kg, or about 318 Earths. This is twice the mass of all the other planets in the Solar System put together.
Jupiter can be seen with the naked eye. It was known to the ancient Romans, who named it after their god Jupiter (Latin: "Iuppiter"). Jupiter is the third brightest object in the night sky. Only the Earth's moon and Venus are brighter.
Jupiter has at least 67 moons. Of these, 55 are very small and less than five kilometres wide. The four largest moons of Jupiter are Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto. They are collectively called the Galilean moons, because they were discovered by the Italian astronomer Galileo Galilei. Ganymede is the largest moon in the Solar System. It is larger in diameter even than Mercury.
Structure.
Jupiter is the biggest planet in the Solar System with a diameter of 142,984 km. This is eleven times bigger than the diameter of Earth.
Atmosphere.
The atmosphere near the surface of Jupiter is made of about 88 to 92% hydrogen, 8 to 12% helium, and 1% other gases. 
Further into the planet it is so hot and the pressure so high that helium becomes a liquid and precipitates or rains further down into the planet. Based on spectroscopy, Jupiter seems to be made of similar gases to Saturn. It is not as similar to Neptune or Uranus. These two planets have much less hydrogen and helium gas.
The very high temperatures and pressures in Jupiter's core mean scientists cannot tell what materials would be there. This cannot be found out, because it is not possible to create the same amount of pressure on Earth. 
Above the unknown inner core is an outer core. The outer core of Jupiter is thick, liquid hydrogen. The pressure is high enough to make the hydrogen solid, but then it melts because of the heat.
Mass.
Jupiter is twice as massive as all the other planets in the Solar System put together. It gives off more heat than it gets from the sun.
Jupiter is 11 times the width of Earth and 318 times as massive. The volume of Jupiter is 1,317 times the volume of Earth. In other words, 1,317 Earth-sized objects could fit inside it.
Cloud layers.
Jupiter has many bands of clouds going horizontally across its surface. The light parts are called zones and the darker are called belts. The zones and belts often interact with each other. This causes huge storms. Wind speeds of 360 kilometres per hour (km/h) are common on Jupiter. To show the difference the strongest tropical storms on Earth are about 100 km/h.
Most of the clouds on Jupiter are made of ammonia. There may also be clouds of water vapour similar to clouds on Earth. Spacecrafts such as Voyager 1 have seen lightning on the surface of the planet. Scientists think it was water vapour because lightning needs water vapour. These lightning bolts have been measured as up 1,000 times as powerful as those on Earth.
The brown and orange colours are caused when sunlight passes through or refracts with the many gases in the atmosphere.
Great Red Spot.
One of the biggest features in Jupiter's atmosphere is the Great Red Spot. It is a huge storm which is bigger than the entire Earth. It has been known about for just under 200 years and possibly even longer. Storms can last for hours or as long as hundreds of years in the case of the Great Red Spot.
Magnetic field.
Jupiter has a magnetic field similar to Earth's but 11 times stronger. It is also has what is known as a "magnetosphere". The strength of the field is enough to be a serious danger to any spacecraft travelling past or to Jupiter. The magnetic field is probably caused by the large amounts of liquid metallic hydrogen in the core of Jupiter. The four largest moons of Jupiter orbit or go around the planet within the magnetic field. This protects them from the solar wind. Jupiter's magnetic field is so large, it reaches the orbit of Saturn 7.7 million miles away. The Earth's magnetosphere does not even cover its moon, less than a quarter of a million miles away.
Ring system.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : Rings of Jupiter
Jupiter also has a thin planetary ring system. These rings are very difficult to see, and so they were not discovered until NASA's Voyager 1 probe went to Jupiter in 1979. There are four parts to Jupiter's rings. The closest ring to Jupiter is called the Halo Ring. The next ring is called the Main Ring. It is about 6440 km wide and only 30 km thick. The Main and Halo rings of Jupiter are made of small, dark particles. The third and fourth rings, called the "Gossamer" Rings, are transparent (see through) and are made from microscopic debris and dust. This dust probably comes from small meteors striking the surface of Jupiter's moons. The third ring is called the Amalthea Gossamer Ring, named after moon Amalthea. The outer ring, the Thebe Gossamer Ring, is named after the moon Thebe. The outer edge of this ring is about 220000 km from Jupiter.
Orbit.
The orbit of a planet is the time and path it takes to go around the Sun. In the amount of time it takes for Jupiter to orbit the Sun one time, the Earth orbits the Sun 11.86 times. One year on Jupiter is equal to 11.86 years on Earth. The average distance between Jupiter and the Sun is 778 million kilometres. This is five times the distance between Earth and the Sun. Jupiter is not tilted on its axis as much as the Earth or Mars. This causes it to have no seasons, for example Summer or Winter. Jupiter rotates, or spins around very quickly. This causes the planet to bulge in the middle. Jupiter is the fastest spinning planet in the Solar System. It completes one rotation or spin in 10 hours. Because of the bulge, the length of the equator of Jupiter is much longer than the length from pole to pole.
Research and exploration.
From Earth.
Jupiter is the third brightest object in the night sky, after the Moon and Venus. Because of that, people have always been able to see it from Earth. The first person known to really study the planet was Galileo Galilei in 1610. He was the first person to see Jupiter's moons Io, Europa, Ganymede and Callisto. This was because he used a telescope, unlike anyone before him.
No new moons were discovered for more than two hundred years. In 1892, astronomer E.E Barnard found a new moon using his observatory in California. He called the moon Amalthea. It was the last of Jupiter's 67 moons to be discovered by human observation through a telescope.
In 1994, bits of the comet Shoemaker Levy-9 hit Jupiter. It was the first time a collision or crash between two Solar System objects had been directly seen by people.
From spacecraft.
Eight spacecraft have either flown past or visited Jupiter since 1973. These were Pioneer 10 (1973), Pioneer 11 (1974), Voyagers 1 and 2 (1979), Ulysses (1992 and 2004), Cassini (2000) and New Horizons in 2007. 
The Pioneer missions were the first spacecraft to take close up pictures of Jupiter and its moons. Five years later, the two Voyager spacecraft discovered over 20 new moons. They captured photo evidence of lightning on the night side of Jupiter.
The Ulysses probe was sent to study the Sun. It only went to Jupiter after it had finished its main mission. Ulysses had no cameras so it took no photographs.
In 2006, the Cassini spacecraft, on its way to Saturn, took some very good, very clear pictures of the planet. Cassini also found a moon and took a picture of it but it was too far away to show the details.
The Galileo mission in 1995 was the only spacecraft to go into orbit around Jupiter. It flew around the planet for seven years and studied all of the four biggest moons. It launched a probe into the planet to get information about Jupiter's atmosphere. The probe travelled to a depth of about 150 km before it was crushed by the weight of all the gas above it. This is called pressure. The Galileo spacecraft was also crushed in 2003 when NASA steered the craft into the planet on purpose. They did this so that the craft could not crash into Europa, a moon which scientists think might have life.
Future.
NASA have sent another spacecraft to Jupiter called Juno. It was launched on August 5, 2011. The spacecraft will go into orbit around the planet in July 2016. Several missions have been planned to send spacecraft to Jupiter's moons Europa and Callisto. One called JIMO (Jupiter Icy Moons Orbiter) was cancelled in 2006 because it cost too much money.
Moons.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : Moons of Jupiter
Jupiter has 67 known moons. The four largest were seen by Galileo with his primitive telescope, and nine more can be seen from Earth with modern telescopes. The rest of the moons have been identified by spacecraft. The smallest moon (S/2003 J 12) is only one kilometre across. The largest, Ganymede, has a diameter of 5,262 kilometres. It is bigger than the planet Mercury. The other three Galilean moons are Io, Europa and Callisto. Because of the way they orbit Jupiter, gravity affects three of these moons greatly. The friction caused by the gravity of Europa and Ganymede pulling on Io makes it the most volcanic object in the Solar System. It has over 400 volcanoes, more than three times as many as Earth.
Jupiter in the Solar System.
Jupiter's large gravity has had a big effect on the Solar System. Jupiter protects the inner planets from comets by pulling them towards itself. Because of this, Jupiter has the most comet impacts in the Solar System.
Two groups of asteroids, called Trojan asteroids, have settled into Jupiter's orbit round the Sun. One group is called the "Trojans" and the other group is called the "Greeks". They go around the Sun at the same time as Jupiter.
Other websites.
 Find more information on Jupiter by searching one of Wikipedia's :
 Dictionary definitions from Wiktionary<br>
 from Wikibooks<br>
 from Wikiquote<br>
 from Wikisource<br>
 from Commons<br>
 from Wikinews<br>
 from Wikiversity<br>
 from Wikispecies<br>
 from Wikidata<br>
 from MediaWiki
<indicator name="top-icon"></indicator>

</doc>
<doc id="410" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=410" title="King">
King

A king is a man who rules a country, because of inheritance. A king usually comes to power when the previous monarch dies, who is usually a family member of his. Sometimes a person may become king due to the previous monarch's abdication, for example George VI. For most of history, most countries were ruled in this way, especially in Europe. Some countries, such as France, are no longer monarchies. Some, such as the United Kingdom, still have a royal family. In some countries, people chose a new king from other people to decide from. 
The wife of a king is called a queen. A woman who becomes a ruler because of inheritance is also called a queen.
If a country has a king or a queen, that means it is a monarchy. A country which a king or queen rules is called a kingdom.
Related pages.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="411" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=411" title="Knowledge">
Knowledge

Knowledge means the things which are true, as opposed to opinion. Information which is correct is knowledge. Knowledge can always be supported by evidence, because that is how the word is used. If a statement is not supported by evidence, then it is not knowledge. The evidence makes it justified; it is not an opinion or a guess.
If someone understands an idea or is aware of something, then he or she has knowledge of it. When it makes sense to someone, this knowledge becomes "understanding". A knowledgeable person is someone who knows a lot. If someone has know-how it means that they can put knowledge to work in doing or building something.
Where it comes from.
Knowledge comes from being in an environment, having some experience there, and then sharing what was learned. That way others may gain from what someone else knows.
Types of knowledge.
When doing science, it may be necessary to set up a strict experiment. Then the experience is repeatable and others may repeat it afterwards. 
Other types of knowledge.
Other types of knowledge can be for a more specific purpose, for example learning a language. In business, computers help to record and share what employees know.
Religion and knowledge.
In many expressions of Christianity, such as Catholicism and Anglicanism, knowledge is one of the seven gifts of the Holy Spirit.
In the Garden of Eden knowledge is the factor that made humans greedy and treacherous. But in the Book of Proverbs it states: 'to be wise you must first obey the LORD' (9:10)
In Islam, knowledge (Arabic: علم, "ʿilm") is given great significance. "The All-Knowing" ("al-ʿAlīm") is one of the Names of God, reflecting distinct properties of God in Islam. The Qur'an asserts that knowledge comes from God () and various "hadith" encourage getting knowledge. Muhammad is reported to have said "Seek knowledge from the cradle to the grave" and "Verily the men of knowledge are the inheritors of the prophets". Islamic scholars, theologians and jurists are often given the title "alim", meaning 'knowledgeable'.

</doc>
<doc id="412" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=412" title="Kauai">
Kauai

Kauai (Kaua'i in Hawaiian) is the oldest and fourth largest of the main Hawaiian Islands, in the United States. Known also as the "Garden Isle", Kaua'i lies 105 miles (170 kilometers) across the Kaua'i Channel, northwest of Honolulu on O'ahu. It is of volcanic origin. The highest point is Mount Waialeale, at the center of the island, 5,148 feet (1,570 meters) above sea level. The wettest spot on Earth, with average rainfall of 460 inches (11,648 millimeters) a year, is just east of Mount Waialeale. The high yearly rainfall has eroded deep valleys in the central mountain. It has made canyons with many scenic waterfalls.
The city of Lihue, on the island's southeast side, is the seat of Kauai County. It is the main city on the island. Waimea, on the island's southwest side and once the capital of Kauai, was the first place visited by explorer Captain James Cook in 1778. The city is at the head of one of the most beautiful canyons in the world, Waimea Canyon, whose gorge is 900 meters (3,000 feet) deep.
The island of Kauai was featured in Disney's 2002 animated feature film "Lilo & Stitch".

</doc>
<doc id="413" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=413" title="Kahoolawe">
Kahoolawe

Kahoʻolawe is the smallest of the 8 main volcanic islands in the Hawaiian Islands, in the United States. It is west of Maui and south of Lanaʻi and is 11 miles long by 6 mi across (45 sqmi). The highest point, Lua Makika, is 1477 ft above sea level. The island is rather dry because its low height does not cause much rain (orographic precipitation) to fall from the northeastern trade winds.
Kahoʻolawe was used as a gunfire and bombing target by the United States military because of World War II, and a defense training area by the United States Navy from around 1941 until May 1994. Popular feeling in Hawaiʻi against this practice finally won, and the Navy has been trying to finish a cleanup of unexploded ordnance (bombs and explosive shells) from the island. Ordnance is still buried or lying on the ground. Other items have washed down gullies and still other unexploded ordnance is underwater offshore. In 1981, the entire island was included on the National Register of Historic Places.
The island is planned to be given back to the Hawaiian people. In 1993, the U.S. Congress passed a law that "recognized the cultural importance of the island, required the Navy to return the island to the State, and directed the Navy to do an unexploded ordnance (UXO) cleanup and environmental restoration" . The turnover officially occurred on November 11, 2003, but the cleanup has not yet been completed. The U.S. Navy was given $400 million and 10 years to complete the large cleanup task, but this work has gone much slower than planned.
In 1993, the Hawaii State Legislature established the Kahoʻolawe Island Reserve. It is made up of the whole island and waters out to 2 mi from shore. By State Law, Kahoʻolawe and its waters can only be used for Native Hawaiian cultural, spiritual, and subsistence purposes; fishing; environmental restoration; historic preservation; and education. Commercial uses are not allowed. The Legislature also created the Kahoʻolawe Island Reserve Commission (KIRC) to manage the Reserve while it is held in trust for a "future Native Hawaiian Sovereignty entity" . 
After the cleanup is finished, the restoration of Kahoʻolawe will need ways to control erosion, restore the plant life, recharge the water table, and slowly replace alien plants with native ones. Plans will include methods for damming gullies and reducing rainwater runoff. Non-natives will temporarily stabilize some areas before the permanent planting of native plants.

</doc>
<doc id="414" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=414" title="Killing">
Killing

The act of killing a living thing can be said to have happened when an outside force, usually another life form, has done something to cause it to die.
When a human being is killed by another human being, this event is called a homicide, manslaughter, heroism in time of war, or abortion. When a human being chooses to be killed by their own actions, it is called a suicide.
A kill is also the act of shooting down a fighter aircraft.
The word kill is very serious; it means that someone might soon meet their death if they are not careful. People who kill others are called murderers. 
When a President kills people with a drone, it is called 'defending the homeland'. When the state kills a criminal, it is called Capital punishment. When someone kills a politician it is called assassination. When a person who wants to die is killed by another, it is called euthanasia. When people watch people killing each other on television, it is called crime drama or entertainment. When people kill other people to eat them, it is called cannibalism.

</doc>
<doc id="417" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=417" title="Kilometre">
Kilometre

The kilometre is a common unit used for longer distances on Earth. The international unit for measuring distances is the metre and a kilometre is 1000 metres. It is used in some countries for measuring road and sea distances. In the UK and the USA, the mile is used more than kilometres for road distances and the nautical mile for sea distances.
It is often used to measure the speed of cars, planes and boats by saying how many kilometres it can travel in an hour. This is shown as km/h.
It is also spelled kilometer. This spelling is used in American English.
One kilometre is 0.6214 miles (3280.84 feet). This means that one mile is 1.6093 kilometres.
One kilometre is the approximate distance a healthy adult human being can walk in ten minutes.
Related pages.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="419" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=419" title="Language">
Language

Language is the normal way humans communicate. Only humans use language, though many other animals communicate in various ways. 
Human language has syntax, a set of rules for connecting words together to make statements and questions. Language can also be changed, by adding new words, for example, to describe new things. Other animals may inherit a set of calls which have pre-set functions. 
Language may be done by speech or by writing or by moving the hands to make signs. It follows that language is "not" just any way of communicating. Even some human communication is not language: see non-verbal communication. Humans also use language for thinking.
Language is a word that may be used by extension: 
UNESCO says that 2,500 languages are at risk of becoming extinct.
Universals of language.
All languages share certain things which separate them from all other kinds of communication.
There are many more things in common between languages.
Inheritance.
The capacity to learn and use language is inherited. Normally, all humans are born with this capability. "Which" language is learned by a child depends on which language is spoken by the child's community. The "capacity" is inherited, but the particular language is learned.
Children have a special period, from about 18 months to about four years, which is critical for learning the language. If this is seriously disrupted, then their language skills will be damaged. Adults do not learn languages the same way they did when they were young. So if they learn a second language, it is difficult, and they have little chance of speaking it as well as their native language.
Some children have more than one native language like when they live in a foreign country or when their father speaks a different language from their mother.
Types of language.
Mathematics and computer science use created languages called formal languages (like computer programming languages), but these may or may not be 'true' languages. Mathematics itself is seen as a language by many. Some people consider musical notation to be a way of writing the musical language.
Chinese is the language with the most native speakers in the world, but Chinese is not really a language. It is a close family of dialects, some of which are as different as Romance languages are from one another.
English is often called "the international language". It is the main second language of the world and the language of science, business, and entertainment.
Some languages are made up so that a lot of people around the world can learn them, without the new languages being tied to any specific country or place. One of the most popular of these languages is Esperanto, which is sometimes called "La Internacia Lingvo," or "The International Language." Another of these languages is called Volapuk, which was popular about a hundred years ago but is much less popular now. It has mostly been replaced by languages like Esperanto, Interlingua, and Ido.
Part of the reason that Volapuk became unpopular is that some sounds are hard to say for people who speak Spanish or English, two of the most widely spoken languages in the world.

</doc>
<doc id="423" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=423" title="Leisure">
Leisure

Template codice_1 has been incorrectly substituted.
Leisure (or free time) is when a person can choose what to do. During a person's leisure time, they do not have an obligation to be at school or work at a job. During leisure time, people can do fun activities, family activities, or other non-work activity, such as hobbies. 
Common forms of recreation or leisure are:
A vacation or holiday is the setting aside of time specifically for leisure. During their vacation, some people travel to a different region or country, and stay at a hotel so that they can do things they could not do near home. Other people prefer to spend their vacation time at home in their own community.
In rich industrialized countries such as the US and Canada, as well as in most European countries, workers are allowed to stay home on the weekend (usually Saturday and Sunday), and use it as leisure time. People in poorer developing countries usually have less leisure time, as they have to work longer hours and more days per year.

</doc>
<doc id="424" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=424" title="Live">
Live

Live can be a verb. It rhymes with "give". "To live" means "to be alive" (and not dead). If you live, then you have life.
It can be used in a general way: 
Live can be an adjective. It rhymes with "five".
 
 

</doc>
<doc id="425" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=425" title="Life">
Life

For other uses, see Life (disambiguation).
Life is a biological concept regarding the characteristic, state, or mode that separates a living thing from dead matter. 
The word itself may refer to a living being or ongoing processes of which living things are a part of. it may also refer to the period during which something is functional (as between birth and death), the condition of an entity that has been born but yet has to die or that which makes a living thing alive. 
The study of life is called biology and people who study life are biologists. A lifespan is the average length of life in a species. All known life on Earth is powered by solar energy. Without energy from the sun no life could exist. All life on Earth is based on the chemistry of carbon compounds, specifically involving long-chain molecules such as proteins and nucleic acid. With water, which is essential, the long molecules are wrapped inside membranes to form cells. This may or may not be true of all possible forms of life in the Universe: it is true of all life on Earth today.
Summary.
Living organisms are open systems. They are always changing, because they exchange materials and information with their environment. They undergo metabolism, maintain homeostasis, possess a capacity to grow, respond to stimuli and reproduce.
Through natural selection, they adapt to their environment in successive generations. More complex living organisms can communicate through various means. Many life forms can be found on Earth. The properties common to these organisms—plants, animals, fungi, protists, archaea, and bacteria—are a carbon and water-based cellular form with complex organization and heritable genetic information.
At present, the Earth is the only planet we have detailed information about. The question of whether life exists elsewhere in the Universe is open. There have been a number of claims of life elsewhere in the Universe. None of these have been confirmed so far. The best evidence of life outside of Earth is are nucleic acids that have been found in certain types of meteorites.
Definitions of life.
One explanation of life is called the cell theory. The cell theory has three basic points: All living things are made up of cells. The cell is the smallest living thing that can do all the things needed for life. All cells must come from pre-existing cells.
Something is often said to be alive if it:
However, not all living things fit every point on this list. 
They do, however, fit the biochemical definitions: they are made of the same kind of chemicals.
The thermodynamic definition of life is any system which can keep its entropy levels below maximum (usually through adaptation and mutations).
A modern approach.
A modern definition was given by Humberto Maturana and Francisco Varela in 1980, to which they gave the name "autopoiesis":
Roth commented that "In short, organisms are self-reproducing and self-maintaining, or 'autopoietic', systems". This approach makes use of molecular biology ideas and systems science ideas.

</doc>
<doc id="426" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=426" title="Law">
Law

The law is a set of rules that people are made to follow by the state. The courts and police enforce this system of rules and punish people who break the laws, such as by making them pay a fine or other penalty or sending them to jail. In ancient societies, laws were written by leaders, to set out rules on how people can live, work and do business with each other. Today in most countries, laws are written and voted on by groups of elected politicians in a legislature, such as a parliament or congress. To follow the laws of a society is to do legal things. An activity is illegal if it breaks a law or does not follow the laws.
A legal code is a written code of laws that are enforced. This may deal with things like police, courts, or punishments. A lawyer, jurist or attorney is a professional who studies and argues the rules of law. In the United States, there are two kinds of attorneys - "transactional" attorneys who write contracts and "litigators" who go to court. In the United Kingdom, these professionals are called solicitors and barristers respectively. 
The "Rule of Law" is the law which says that government can only legally use its power in a way the government and the people agree on. It limits the powers a government has, as agreed in a country's constitution. The "Rule of Law" prevents dictatorship and protects the rights of the people. When leaders enforce the legal code honestly, even on themselves and their friends, this is an example of the rule of law being followed. "The rule of law", wrote the ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle in 350 BC, "is better than the rule of any individual."
Culture is usually a major source of the principles behind many laws, as people tend to trust the ideas based on family and social habits. In many countries throughout history, religion and religious books like the Vedas, Bible or the Koran have been a major source of law.
Civil law and common law.
Civil law is the legal system used in most countries around the world today. Civil law is based on legislation that is found in constitutions or statutes passed by government. The secondary part of civil law is the legal approaches that are part of custom. In civil law governments, judges do not generally have much power, and most of the laws and legal precedent are created by Members of Parliament.
Common law is based on the decisions made by judges in past court cases. It comes from England and it became part of almost every country that once belonged to the British Empire, except Malta, Scotland, the U.S. state of Louisiana, and the Canadian province of Quebec. It is also the predominant form of law in the United States, where many laws called statutes are written by Congress, but many more legal rules exist from the decisions of the courts. Common law had its beginnings in the Middle Ages, when King John was forced by his barons to sign a document called the Magna Carta.
Religious law.
Religious law is law based on religious beliefs or books. Examples include the Jewish Halakha, Islamic Sharia, and Christian Canon law. 
Until the 1700s, Sharia law was the main legal system throughout the Muslim world. In some Muslim countries such as Saudi Arabia and Iran, the whole legal systems still base their law on Sharia law. Islamic law is often criticised because it often has harsh penalties for crimes. A serious criticism is the judgement of the European Court that "sharia is incompatible with the fundamental principles of democracy". 
The Turkish Refah Party's sharia-based "plurality of legal systems, grounded on religion" was ruled to contravene the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. The Court decided Refah's plan would "do away with the State's role as the guarantor of individual rights and freedoms" and "infringe the principle of non-discrimination between individuals as regards their enjoyment of public freedoms, which is one of the fundamental principles of democracy".
History of law.
The history of law is closely connected to the development of human civilizations . Ancient Egyptian law developed in 3000 BC. In 1760 BC King Hammurabi, took ancient Babylonian law and organized it, and then had it chiseled in stone for the public to see in the marketplace. These laws became known as the Code of Hammurabi. 
The Torah from the Old Testament is an old body of law. It was written around 1280 BC. It has moral rules such as the Ten Commandments, which tell people what things are not permitted.
Judiciary.
The judiciary is a group of judges who resolve people's disputes and determine whether people who are charged with crimes are guilty. In some jurisdictions the judge does not find guilt or innocence but instead directs a jury, how to interpret facts facts from a legal perspective, but the jury determines the facts based on evidence presented to them and finds the guilt or innocences of the charged person. Most countries of common law and civil law systems have a system of appeals courts, up to a supreme authority such as the Supreme Court or the High Court. The highest courts usually have the power to remove laws that are unconstitutional (which go against the constitution).
Legislature.
In democracies, the people in a country usually choose people called politicians to represent them in a legislature. Examples of legislatures include the Houses of Parliament in London, the Congress in Washington, D.C., the Bundestag in Berlin, the Duma in Moscow and the Assemblée nationale in Paris. Most legislatures have two chambers or houses, a 'lower house' and an 'upper house'. To pass legislation, a majority of Members of Parliament must vote for a bill in each house. The legislature is the branch of government that writes laws, and votes on whether they will be approved.
Executive (government) and Head of State.
The executive is the governing center of political authority. In most democratic countries, the executive is elected from people who are in the legislature. This group of elected people is called the cabinet. In France, the US and Russia, the executive branch has a President which exists separately from the legislature. 
The executive suggests new laws and deals with other countries. As well, the executive usually controls the military, the police, and the bureaucracy. The executive selects ministers, or secretaries of state to control departments such as the health department or the department of justice. 
In many jurisdictions the Head of State does not take part in the day to day governance of the jurisdiction and takes a largely ceremonial role. This is the case in many Commonwealth nations where the Head of State, usually a Governor almost exclusively acts "on the advice" of the head of the Executive (e.g. the Prime Minister, First Minister or Premier). The primary legal role of the Head of State in these jurisdictions is to act as a check or balance against the Executive, as the Head of State has the rarely exercised power to dissolve the legislature, call elections and dismiss ministers. 
Other parts of the legal system.
The police enforce the criminal laws by arresting people suspected of breaking the law. Bureaucrats are the government workers and government organizations that do work for the government. Bureaucrats work within a system of rules, and they make their decisions in writing. 
Lawyers are people who have learned about laws. Lawyers give people advice about their legal rights and duties and represent people in court. To become a lawyer, a person has to complete a two- or three-year university program at a law school and pass an entrance examination. Lawyers work in a law firms, for the government, for companies, or by themselves. 
Civil society is the people and groups that are not part of government that try to protect people against human rights abuses and try to protect freedom of speech and other individual rights. Organizations that are part of civil society include political parties, debating clubs, trade unions, human rights organizations, newspapers and charities.
"Corporations are among the organizations that use the legal system to further their goals. Like the others, they use means such as campaign donations and advertising to persuade people that they are right. Corporations also engage in commerce and make new things such as automobiles, vaporisers/e-cigarettes, and Unmanned_aerial_vehicles (i.e. "drones") that the old laws are not well equipped to deal with.

</doc>
<doc id="428" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=428" title="Ludovic Lazarus Zamenhof">
Ludovic Lazarus Zamenhof

Ludovic Lazarus Zamenhof (December 15, 1859 – April 14, 1917) was a eye doctor, linguist, and scholar who created the international language Esperanto. 
Zamenhof was born in 1859 in the town of Białystok, Poland. At the time, Poland was a part of the Russian Empire. Bialystok contained three major groups: Poles, Belorussians, and Yiddish-speaking Jews. Zamenhof thought that one common language would join these groups and stop fights between them.
His first language was said to be Polish. His parents spoke Russian and Yiddish in the home. His father was a German teacher, so Zamenhof learned that language from an early age and spoke the language fluently. Later he learned French, Latin, Greek, Hebrew and English. He also had an interest in Italian, Spanish and Lithuanian.
Zamenhof decided that the international language must have a simple grammar and be easier to learn than Volapük, an earlier international language. He attempted to create the international language with a grammar that was rich, and complex. The basics of Esperanto were published in 1887.
His grandson, Louis-Christophe Zaleski-Zamenhof, has lived in France since the 1960s.

</doc>
<doc id="430" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=430" title="List of countries">
List of countries

This is a list of sovereign states.
A.
Afghanistan - Albania - Algeria - Andorra - Angola - Antigua and Barbuda - Argentina - Armenia - Aruba - Australia - Austria - Azerbaijan
B.
The Bahamas - Bahrain - Bangladesh "(formerly East Pakistan)" - Barbados - Belarus - Belgium - Belize - Benin - Bermuda - Bhutan - Bolivia - Bosnia and Herzegovina - Botswana - Brazil - Brunei - Bulgaria - Burkina Faso (formerly Upper Volta) - Myanmar (formerly "Burma") - Burundi
C.
Cambodia - Cameroon - Canada - Cape Verde - Central African Republic - Chad - Chile - People's Republic of China - Republic of China ("Taiwan") - Colombia - Comoros - Democratic Republic of the Congo (formerly "Zaire") - Republic of the Congo - Costa Rica - Côte d'Ivoire - Croatia - Cuba - Republic of Cyprus - Czech Republic
D.
Denmark - Djibouti - Dominica - Dominican Republic
E.
East Timor - Ecuador - Egypt - El Salvador - Equatorial Guinea - Eritrea - Estonia - Ethiopia
F.
Fiji - Finland - France - Faroe Islands
G.
Gabon - The Gambia - Georgia - Germany - Ghana - Greece - Grenada - Guatemala - Guinea - Guinea-Bissau - Guyana
H.
Haiti - Holy See (see Vatican City) - Honduras - Hungary
I.
Iceland - India - Indonesia - Iran - Iraq - Ireland - Israel - Italy - Ivory Coast (see Côte d'Ivoire)
J.
Jamaica - Japan - Jordan
K.
Kazakhstan - Kenya - Kiribati - Korea - Korea, North - Korea, South - Kuwait - Kyrgyzstan
L.
Laos - Latvia - Lebanon - Lesotho - Liberia - Libya - Liechtenstein - Lithuania - Luxembourg
M.
Republic of Macedonia - Madagascar - Malawi - Malaysia - Maldives - Mali - Malta - Marshall Islands - Mauritania - Mauritius - Mexico - Federated States of Micronesia - Moldova - Monaco - Mongolia - Montenegro - Morocco - Mozambique - Myanmar
N.
Namibia - Nauru - Nepal - Netherlands - New Zealand (Aotearoa) - Nicaragua - Niger - Nigeria - Niue - North Korea - Norway
O.
Oman
P.
Pakistan - Palau - Panama - Papua New Guinea - Paraguay - Peru - Philippines - Poland - Portugal - Puerto Rico
Q.
Qatar
R.
Romania - Russia - Rwanda
S.
Saint Kitts and Nevis - Saint Lucia - Saint Vincent and the Grenadines - Samoa - San Marino - São Tomé and Príncipe - Saudi Arabia - Senegal - Serbia - Seychelles - Sierra Leone - Singapore - Slovakia - Slovenia - Solomon Islands - Somalia - South Africa - South Korea - South Sudan - Spain - Sri Lanka - Sudan - Suriname - Swaziland - Sweden - Switzerland - Syria
T.
Taiwan (see Republic of China) - Tajikistan - Tanzania - Tatarstan - Thailand - Tibet - Togo - Tonga - Trinidad and Tobago - Tunisia - Turkey - Turkmenistan - Tuvalu
U.
Uganda - Ukraine - United Arab Emirates - United Kingdom - United States - Uruguay - Uzbekistan
V.
Vanuatu - Vatican City ("Holy See") - Venezuela - Vietnam
Y.
Yemen
Z.
Zaire (now Democratic Republic of the Congo) - Zambia - Zimbabwe

</doc>
<doc id="431" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=431" title="Provinces and territories of Canada">
Provinces and territories of Canada

Canada's land is composed of thirteen parts: ten provinces and three territories. Canada is governed on the principles of a federation: the Provinces' governments share power with the Government of Canada (the federal government). The territories' governments have a more limited set of powers versus the federal government than that of the provinces'.
The provinces are in the south of Canada, and the territories are in the north, where fewer people live.
Here is a list of the provinces, and their standard abbreviations, with their capitals (the cities where their governments have their offices). Canada's capital city is Ottawa. 
Pacific Coast or West Coast
The Prairies
Central Canada
Atlantic Canada
The Maritimes
The three territories are:

</doc>
<doc id="432" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=432" title="Las Vegas">
Las Vegas

Las Vegas is a city in the American state of Nevada. There were 567,641 people living in the city in 2009. It is the biggest city in Nevada. Las Vegas is also the county seat of Clark County in Nevada. 
History.
Mormon farmers first lived there in 1854. It was called "Las Vegas" by Spanish people. The name means "The Meadows" in the Spanish language. It had a lot of these in 1854. The city is known for its dry weather, as is the rest of southern Nevada. It is surrounded by deserts.
The US Army built Fort Baker there in 1864. Las Vegas has springs so people used to stop there for water when they were going to Los Angeles or other places in California.
In 1905, 110 acres owned by William A. Clark, on which he built a railroad to Southern California were auctioned and Las Vegas was founded as a railroad town. Las Vegas officially became a city in 1911.
Culture.
Las Vegas, also known by a shorter name, Vegas. People know of it because laws are easier for things that can be done such as drinking and gambling. Gambling was made legal in the state of Nevada in 1931. In 1941, many hotels were built in Las Vegas with casinos in them. Las Vegas is sometimes called "Sin City" because so many people come to the city for gambling and drinking alcohol, two common "sins".
People come to Las Vegas for vacation, many hotels have different themes and have shows and events to get people to come there. Because of this, Las Vegas is called "The Entertainment Capital of the World".
Las Vegas is also known for its many casinos, decorated with various bright colours. Some casinos include Caesars Palace, a Roman Empire themed casino, Bellagio, a Bellagio, Italy themed casino, Paris Las Vegas, a Paris themed casino, Monte Carlo Las Vegas, a Monte Carlo, Monaco themed casino, and New York New York, a New York City themed casino. The city of Las Vegas is in downtown Las Vegas. People who visit Las Vegas in the Las Vegas Strip are mostly in Paradise, Nevada, the other is in Winchester, Nevada not in the city of Las Vegas.

</doc>
<doc id="433" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=433" title="Lanai">
Lanai

Lanai (or Lānaʻi) is sixth largest of the Hawaiian Islands, in the United States. It is also known as the "Pineapple Island". The island is almost a circle in shape and is 18 miles wide in the longest direction. The land area is 140 sq. miles (367 km2). It is separated from the island of Moloka'i by the Kalohi Channel to the north.
History.
Lana'i was first seen by Europeans on 25 February 1779 by Captain Clerke, with "HMS Resolution" on the James Cook Pacific Ocean trip. Clerke took command of the ship after Capt. Cook was killed at Kealakekua Bay on February 14, and was leaving the islands for the North Pacific. 
In 1922, Jim Dole, the president of Dole Pineapple Company, bought the island of Lana'i. He made a large part of it into the world's largest pineapple plantation. 
Tourism.
Tourism on Lana'i started not long ago. That was when the growing of pineapple was slowly coming to an end in the Islands. On Lana'i, you can be with nature and feel the mood of the Hawaiian countryside. Not like nearby O'ahu, the only town (Lana'i City) is small. It has no traffic or shopping centers. Tourists come mainly to relax.
There are three hotels on Lana'i and several golf courses.

</doc>
<doc id="434" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=434" title="Leap year">
Leap year

A leap year comes once every four years. It is a year in which an extra day is added to the Gregorian calendar which is used by most of the world. 
An ordinary year has 365 days. A leap year has 366 days. The extra day is added to the month of February. In an ordinary year, February has 28 days. In a leap year, it has 29 days. This extra day is called a leap day.
In a leap year, January, April, and July, all start on the same day of the week.
In a leap year, February starts and ends on the same day.
A leap year can always be evenly divided by four. For example, 2012 was a leap year. But a year is not a leap year if it can be evenly divided by 100 but cannot also be evenly divided by 400. This is why 1600, 2000, and 2400 are leap years, but 1700, 1800, and 1900 were not.
We have leap years because instead of 365 days, the Earth really takes a few minutes less than 365-1/4 days (365.24219) to go completely around the Sun.
Without leap years, the seasons would start one day earlier on the calendar every four years. After 360 years, spring (which usually begins on March 21) would begin on December 21 (which is when winter presently begins).
A number of countries use a lunar calendar (based on the moon). They have leap years when they add an extra lunar month. Different calendars add the extra month in different ways.

</doc>
<doc id="443" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=443" title="Leather">
Leather

Leather is the skin of an animal used as a material. The skins of cows, pigs, and goats are often used to make leather. Skins of snakes, alligators or crocodiles, and ostriches are sometimes used to make fancier leather. Shoes, bags, clothes, and balls are often made of leather. Sometimes people make leather out of whales, ducks, giraffes, and African elephants, but all of these ways of making leather are very simple but can also be very hard and rare sometimes. 
 "This can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".</div >

</doc>
<doc id="444" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=444" title="License">
License

A license (or licence) allows someone to do something that they otherwise are not allowed to do. A person usually has to pay some money, and maybe pass a test to get a license. A license is usually written but it does not have to be. Most kinds of licenses can only be used by the person they were given to. Licenses may be temporary or permanent. Some licenses can not be taken away once they are given. A person with a license is called a licensee.
For example, John has a license to sell vegetables in the market for 10 years from 2010 to 2020. John grants an exclusive license to Jane to sell vegetables for 4 years from 2012 to 2016. Here, John will be referred as "licensor" and Jane will be referred as "licensee".
In many countries, if a person tries to do something without the correct license to do it, he might have to pay a fine or go to prison.
Examples of licenses.
There are many different types of licenses.
Driver's license.
The laws of most countries say that people are only allowed to drive cars if they have a driver's license. If a person does not have a license, they may have to pay a fine if they are caught by the police. In many countries, a person must take a test and pay money to get a license. The test would check that they know the road rules, and have the skill to drive a car.
Hunting license.
Other licenses give permission to shoot animals (often called a hunting license). The hunting license usually says when a person may hunt. A hunter may have to pass a test to show that he understands the rules about hunting.
Television licence.
In the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland, if someones has a television set, they must buy a "television licence" every year.
Patent, copyright, and trademark licenses.
A person or a company can also give a license to a patent, copyright, or trademark that they own. In those cases, the government has said that the owner may stop other people from using their rights. So in order for another person to use an owner's patent, copyright, or trademark, they need permission from the owner. For example, when someone buys computer software, they also need a license from the creator of the software (a copyright owner) allowing the buyer to use the software.
Difference between license and licence.
"License" is a verb and "licence" is a noun. "Licensing sessions" were the meetings of magistrates which decided about giving licences to sell alcohol. 
In American English there is no difference in spelling between the verb "to license" meaning to give permission, and the noun "a license" meaning the permission to do something. 
Distinction between a licence and a qualification.
A degree in medicine is a qualification showing a person has successfully studied medicine. It is awarded for life. A licence to practice medicine is a legal permission to do so within the territory covered by the licensing authority. The licence may be taken away under certain situations.
Related pages.
 "This can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".</div >

</doc>
<doc id="445" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=445" title="Link">
Link

A link, also hyperlink in computing, is a part of a chain. A chain is made of many pieces of metal; each piece is a link. 
Today, people also use the word link in a new way. The World Wide Web on the Internet is made of many different Web pages. The computer software that people use to make these pages (HTML) lets us go to other pages in a very fast and easy way. 
The person who makes the web page can tell the computer to show a word or a picture on the Web page as a link. This means that when we click on the link with our computer mouse, the computer will show us the new page we want to see. Most links are blue, but they can be any color.
The color of the link will change to dark blue when clicked as the web browser recognises it in the browser's cache. Unless the cache is cleared, the link will always stay dark blue.
Ways of making links.
There are many ways in making a link on a web page. The process is different for different internet software.
Plain HTML.
In .htm and .html files, a link can be created using this code:
Text of link
WikiSyntax.
WikiSyntax like MediaWiki uses a simpler way of making links. To create a link to another page of the same website:
Link text or just Page name.
To link to an external website:
, , or just http://www.example.com.
BB code.
BB code is used in forum software. To create a link:
[url]http://www.example.com[/url], or [url=http://www.example.com]Link text[/url]
 "This can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".</div >

</doc>
<doc id="446" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=446" title="Library">
Library

A library is a place where many books are kept. Most libraries are public and let people take the books to use in their home. Most libraries let people borrow books for several weeks. Some belong to institutions, for example, companies, churches, schools, and universities. Also a person's bookshelves at home can have many books and be a library. The people who work in libraries are librarians.
Other libraries keep famous or rare books. There are a few "Copyright libraries" which have a copy of every book which has been written in that country. Some libraries also have other things that people might like, such as magazines, music on CDs, or computers where people can use the Internet. In school they offer software to learn the alphabet and other details.
A library is not a bookstore (a store that sells books).
Public libraries.
Many places have a public library, where anybody can join if they live in the area. With a library card, people can borrow books and take them home for several weeks. It does not cost money to get a library card at most public libraries.
Books are kept on shelves in a special order so they are easy to find. Public libraries have stories and books about lots of things. Many public libraries have books and CDs about learning English. Stories are kept in alphabetical order by the last name of the person who wrote them, the author. Books about other things are often given a special number, that refers to what they are about. They are then put on the shelf in number order. One number system used by many libraries is the Dewey decimal system.
Academic libraries.
Many colleges and universities have large academic libraries. These libraries are for the use of college students, professors, and researchers. Academic libraries are used mainly for doing research like studying the solar system or how earthquakes happen. These libraries do not have the same types of books you would find in a public library. They usually do not have fiction books or books for children (unless they are being studied). Academic libraries can have many books, sometimes more than a million.
Special libraries.
Special libraries are those libraries that are not public libraries or academic libraries. They are usually small. Many times a special library holds books on a particular subject or even a special kind of book. Some special libraries keep just old books or books by Shakespeare. A special library can be owned by a business for use only by that business. For example, Disney World in Orlando has its own library that is not open to the public but for the use of the people who work for the company.
Librarians.
A librarian is a person who works in a library. Librarians help people find books and information. They can teach people how to find books and use the library. A professional librarian is a person who went to school to study library science. They can earn a degree called a Masters in Library Science.
History.
The earliest known library was discovered Iraq and belonged to the ancient civilization in Sumer. They didn't used paper books but instead wrote everything on clay tablets using a style of writing called cuneiform. These tablets are over 5,000 years old. The Library of Alexandria, in Egypt, was the largest and most important library of the ancient world. It was destroyed when the Romans conquered Egypt in 30 BC. Rome’s first public library was established by Asinius Pollio who was a lieutenant of Julius Caesar. Eventually Rome would build 28 public libraries within the city. When the Roman Empire fell in 330 AD, many books went east to the city of Byzantium where a large library was built. Other libraries were built in monasteries and public homes.
Libraries began to appear in many Islamic cities where science and philosophy survived after the fall of the Roman Empire. Surprisingly, Christian monks and Islamic libraries exchanged books to copy. These books eventually made there way back to the West and helped start the Renaissance. European universities began the practice of creating academic libraries at this time for the use of their students.
The 17th and 18th centuries was called "The Golden Age of Libraries" when national libraries were being created all over Europe. These national libraries collected books that were published in their own country as well as some books from other countries.

</doc>
<doc id="448" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=448" title="List of mathematics topics">
List of mathematics topics

There are a number of topics in mathematics. Some of them include:

</doc>
<doc id="450" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=450" title="Like">
Like

Like can mean some different things: 
1. We can use to like to say that we find a thing is good: 
2. We can use like for "the same as" or "nearly the same as":
3. We can also use like for "the same way as":
4. In a question, we can use like to ask people to talk about a thing, or to say if they find it good or not:
5. We can also use like as "for example":
6. In British and American English young people, when talking, have recently started using like as an extra word in the middle of sentences. Sometimes they use it to report what someone said, especially when mimicking the way they said it. This should never be used in writing:
As works in the same way as example 2 - comparing two things using either the word "like" or the word "as" is called making a simile ("As big as an elephant"). It may be better to use the word "as" for this to stop confusion with example 1.

</doc>
<doc id="453" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=453" title="Political divisions of China">
Political divisions of China

There are twenty-three provinces, four municipalities, five autonomous regions and two special administrative regions in the People's Republic of China. The island of Taiwan is claimed as a "province" by the People's Republic of China (PRC), but it not under their control. Taiwan is currently a democratic island known officially as the Republic of China (Taiwan).
Provinces-level divisions.
There are 34 provinces-level divisions in the People's Republic of China.
Special Administrative Regions.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="454" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=454" title="List of fruits">
List of fruits

Fruits on this wiki are defined as the word is used in everyday speech. It does not include vegetables, whatever their origin. The following are fruits: 

</doc>
<doc id="457" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=457" title="Legislature">
Legislature

Legislature is a word that comes from the Latin language, meaning "those who write the laws." The legislature of a state or country is a group of people, each of whom got his or her office either by winning an election or by being appointed, to vote for the best laws. The way a legislature is supposed to work can usually be found in the constitution of that state or country.
In many countries, the legislature is called a Parliament, Congress or National Assembly etc. Sometimes the legislature is made up of two separate houses. This is called a "bicameral" legislature.
A county, district, city, or other small area also has a council, that makes the rules and laws for its level of government. The way a council works can usually be found in the area's "charter".

</doc>
<doc id="459" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=459" title="Linear algebra">
Linear algebra

Linear algebra is a branch of mathematics. It came from mathematicians trying to solve systems of linear equations. Vectors and matrices are used to solve these systems. The main objects of study currently are vector spaces and linear mappings between vector spaces. Linear algebra is useful in other branches of mathematics (e.g. differential equations and analytic geometry). It can also be applied to the real world in areas such as engineering, physics and economics.
Linear algebra describes ways to solve and manipulate (rearrange) systems of linear equations.
For example, consider the following equations:
These two equations form a system of linear equations.
It is linear because none of the variables are raised to a power.
The graph of a linear equation in two variables is a straight line.
The solution to this system is:
since it makes all of the original equations valid, that is, the value on left side of the equals sign is exactly the same as the value on the right side for both equations.
Linear algebra uses a system of notation for describing system behavior, called a matrix. For the previous example, the coefficients of the equations can be stored in a coefficient matrix.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="460" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=460" title="London">
London

For the city in Canada, see London, Ontario.
London is by far the largest city in England and the United Kingdom. 8.63 million people live in London, which is on the River Thames. It is the capital of the United Kingdom. 
London is the biggest city in middle Europe, and the world's largest financial centre.
London was founded by the Romans in AD 43 and called "Londinium". London is also known as "Lunnainn" in Scottish Gaelic, "Llundain" in Welsh and "Londain" in Irish.
For a long time, London was a small city. All its people lived inside the walls that were built by the Romans. This area is still called the City of London. There were many villages around the city. Gradually, more and more people came to live there. Then, step by step, the villages joined together into one huge city.
The city has a huge network of transport systems. The Victorians built a number of railway systems in the mid-19th century. Their main stations are in London, and the lines go to every corner of Great Britain. There were originally five major companies, which were merged into a national rail network in modern times.
There is also the world's first underground railway system, London Underground, which is the main way commuters get into London. There are five airports, though only one is actually in London (the City Airport). There is the London end of the London–Birmingham canal, which was important to the industrial 19th century.
Most people in London are British. However, London also has many immigrants. These people come from many different countries. They speak many different languages and have different religions and cultures. There are also many people from different countries who stay in London on business. Many people visit London as tourists. They may see the famous "Sights of London". These sights include palaces, churches and museums.
London is one of the world's most important cities for business, finance, and politics. It is also important for culture: media, entertainment, fashion, and art.
History.
The Romans built a city called "Londinium" on the River Thames in AD 43. The name "Londinium" (and then 'London') came from the Celtic language of the Ancient Britons. In the year AD 61, Queen Boudica (a British Celtic queen) and her army destroyed the city. Boudica killed herself when Romans trapped her. Then the Romans rebuilt London. London became an important trading city. After the Romans left Britain, few people lived in the city for a long time. This is because the Anglo-Saxons liked living in the countryside. In the 9th century, more people started living there again. It became the largest city in England. However, it did not become the capital city of England until the 12th century.
After the railways were built, London grew very big. Greater London has 33 London Boroughs and a mayor. The old City of London is only a square mile in size but has its own Lord Mayor.
Another famous old part of Greater London is Westminster, which was always a different city from the City of London. In Westminster is Westminster Abbey (a cathedral), The Palace of Westminster (the Houses of Parliament, with Big Ben), and 10 Downing Street (where the Prime Minister lives).
Climate.
London has an oceanic, or temperate climate. It is not usually very hot or cold. It is often cloudy.
Landmarks.
 tnone" style="margin-left: auto; margin-right:auto; width:99%; max-width:8px;">
"A panorama of modern London, taken from the Golden Gallery of Saint Paul’s Cathedral"
Twinnings.
London has twin and sister city agreements with these cities:
London also has a "partnership" agreement with Tokyo, Japan.

</doc>
<doc id="461" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=461" title="Litre">
Litre

A litre (liter in the United States) is one of the metric units of volume. It is not an SI unit. 
One litre is the volume of one cubic decimetre, that is a cube of 10 x 10 x 10 centimetres. One litre of water has the mass of exactly one kilogram. This results from the definition given in 1795, where the gram was defined as the weight of one cubic centimetre of melting ice.
The symbol for litre is "L" or "l". 
For smaller volumes the decilitre is used: 10 dl = one litre.
For smaller volumes the centilitre is used: 100 cl = one litre.
For smaller volumes the millilitre is used: 1000 ml = one litre.
The capital letter "L" is preferred by some people as the small "l" can look like the number one "1".
History.
The metric system was first introduced in France in 1791. That system did not have its own unit of capacity or volume because volume can be measured in cubic metres. In 1793 work to make the metric system compulsory in France was started by the Temporary Commission of Republican Weights and Measures. Due to public demand, the commission said that the cubic metre was too big for everyday use. They said that a new unit based on the old cadil should be used instead. One cadil was to be 0.001 cubic metres. This was equivalent to a cube with sides 10 cm. The "cadil" was also known as the "pinte" or the "litron". The "pinte" had been an old French unit of measure of capacity. In 1795 the definition was revised. The "cadil" was given the name "litre". 
In 1795 the kilogram was defined to be exactly one litre of water at 4 °C. In 1799 the kilogram was redefined. The new definition said that the kilogram was the mass of the "kilogram des archives". In 1901 scientists measured the volume of one litre of water at 4 °C very carefully. They found that it occupied about 1.000028 dm3. The BIPM redefined the litre as being "exactly" the volume of one kilogram of water at 4 °C.
In 1960 the SI was introduced. The BIPM changed the definition of the litre back to "one dm3". The litre is not part of SI. The BIPM defined the litre as a "Non-SI unit accepted for use with the SI". This was because it is used in many countries. The BIPM said that the litre should not be used very very accurate work.
According to SI rules, the symbol for the litre should be "l". This is because the litre was not named after somebody whose name was "Litre". However the symbol "l" and the number "1" are easily confused. In 1979 the BIPM made an exception for the symbol for the litre. They said that people could use either "L" or "l" as its symbol.

</doc>
<doc id="465" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=465" title="Lime">
Lime

Lime is a fruit tree, and the fruit itself . They are citrus fruits similar to lemons. Limes have a lot of vitamin C. Sailors from Britain were given lemon or lime juice to stop them falling ill with scurvy. This is how they got the nickname "Limey".
Limes are small, round and bright green. If they stay on the tree for a long time they turn yellow. Then they look like small round lemons.
Lime juice is used in cooking and in drinks. Lime oils are often used in perfumes, used for cleaning, and used for aromatherapy.
Lime tastes acidic and bitter. Lime juice is also made from limes.
Other websites.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="467" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=467" title="Mathematics">
Mathematics

Mathematics, sometimes shortened to maths (in England, Australia, New Zealand and France) or math (in the United States, Canada, Germany and the Philippines) is the study of numbers, shapes and patterns. Mathematicians are people who learn about and discover such things in mathematics. Mathematics is useful for solving problems that occur in the real world, so many people besides mathematicians study and use mathematics. Today, mathematics is needed in many jobs. Business, science, engineering, and construction need some knowledge of mathematics.
Mathematicians solve problems by using logic. Mathematicians often use deduction. Deduction is a special way of thinking to discover and prove new truths using old truths. To a mathematician, the reason something is true is just as important as the fact that it is true. Using deduction is what makes mathematical thinking different from other kinds of thinking.
About.
"Mathematics" includes the study of:
Mathematics uses logic, paper, and calculator. These things are used to create general rules, which are an important part of mathematics. These rules leave out information that is not important so that a single rule can cover many situations. By finding general rules, mathematics solves many problems at the same time. 
A "proof" gives a reason why a rule in mathematics is correct. This is done by using certain other rules that everyone agrees are correct, which are called "axioms". A rule that has a proof is sometimes called a "theorem". Experts in mathematics perform research to create new theorems. Sometimes experts find an idea that they think is a theorem but can not find a proof for it. That idea is called a "conjecture" until they find a proof.
Sometimes, mathematics finds and studies rules or ideas in the real world that we don't understand yet. Often in mathematics, ideas and rules are chosen because they are considered simple or neat. On the other hand, sometimes these ideas and rules are found in the real world after they are studied in mathematics; this has happened many times in the past. In general, studying the rules and ideas of mathematics can help us understand the world better.
Famous theorems.
These theorems have interested mathematicians and people who are not mathematicians.
These are theorems and conjectures that have greatly changed mathematics.
Foundations and methods.
Progress in understanding the nature of mathematics also influences the way mathematicians study their subject.
History and the world of mathematicians.
Mathematics in history, and the history of mathematics.
Name.
The word "mathematics" comes from the Greek word "μάθημα" (máthema). The Greek word "μάθημα" means "science, knowledge, or learning". 
Often, the word "mathematics" is made shorter into "maths" (in British English) or "math" (in American English). The short words "maths" or "math" are often used for arithmetic, geometry or simple algebra by students and their schools.
Awards in mathematics.
There is no Nobel prize in mathematics. Mathematicians can receive the Abel prize and the Fields Medal for important works. 
The Clay Mathematics Institute has said it will give one million dollars to anyone who solves one of the Millennium Prize Problems
Mathematical tools.
Old:
New:

</doc>
<doc id="468" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=468" title="March">
March

March is the third month of the year in the Gregorian calendar, coming between February and April. It has 31 days. March is named after Mars, the Roman god of war.
The Month.
In ancient Rome, March was called Martius. It was named after the war god (Mars) and the Romans thought that it was a lucky time to begin a war. Before Julius Caesar's calendar reform, March was the first month of the year in the Roman calendar, as the winter was considered to be a monthless period.
March has 31 days, and is one of seven months in the year to have that number of days. In common years it starts on the same day of the week as February, and it always starts on the same day of the week as November of the same year. In a common year, March starts on the same day of the week as June of the previous year, and in leap years starts on the same day of the week as September and December of the previous year. Every year, March ends on the same day of the week as June, and ends on the same day as December of the previous year if it is a leap year. In leap years, the day before March 1 is February 29. This determines the position of each day of the year from there on. As an example, March 1 is usually the 60th day of the year, but in a leap year is the 61st day.
In terms of seasons, March is a month that has an equinox, with daylight and darkness of roughly the same number of hours, halfway between the December and June solstices. In the Northern Hemisphere, spring starts in this month, while it is autumn in the Southern Hemisphere. The official start of either season is March 1, though the equinox can fall on March 20 or 21, occasionally on March 19. The northern spring equinox marks the start of the Iranian New Year and Baha'i New Year. It is from the March 21 date that Easter's date is calculated, on the Sunday after the first full moon in spring, meaning it can fall between March 22 and April 25 in Western Christianity. 
March's flower is the daffodil and its birthstones are the bloodstone and aquamarine. The meaning of the bloodstone is courage. The star signs for March are Pisces (February 20 to March 20) and Aries (March 21 to April 20).

</doc>
<doc id="469" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=469" title="May">
May

May is the fifth month of the year, coming between April and June. It has 31 days. The month of May might have been named for the Roman goddess Maia, or more likely the Roman goddess of fertility Bona Dea, whose festival was held in May.
May's flower is the Lily of the Valley. Its birthstone is the emerald. The meaning of the emerald is success in love.
The Month.
May comes between April and June and is the fifth month of the year in the Gregorian calendar. It has 31 days, being one of seven months to do so. In the older Roman calendar, May was the third month of the year. It is a spring month in the Northern Hemisphere and an autumn month in the Southern Hemisphere. May is likely to have been named after the Roman goddess Maia, though there is a theory that May might have its name from the Latin "Maiores", meaning "Seniors". The same theory suggests that June would then be named from "Iuniores", meaning "Juniors".
In any year, no month starts or ends on the same day of the week as May, though January of the following year starts and ends on the same days of the week as May. In a common year it ends on the same day of the week as August and November of the previous year and starts on the same day of the week as August of the previous year. In a leap year, May starts on the same day of the week as February, March and November of the previous year and ends on the same day of the week as March and June of the previous year.
In the Northern Hemisphere, May is in late Spring, and May Day on May 1 and Walpurgis Night, during the night of April 30 to May 1, are symbolic of the transition from winter to summer. In the Southern Hemisphere, it is in autumn, and comes just before the Antarctic winter, when emperor penguins breed there.

</doc>
<doc id="472" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=472" title="Music">
Music

Music is an art that puts sounds together in a way that people like or find interesting. Most music includes people singing with their voices or playing musical instruments, such as the piano, guitar, or drums.
The word "music" comes from the Greek word "μουσική" ("mousike"), which means "(art) of the Muses". In Ancient Greece the Muses included the goddesses of music, poetry, art, and dance. Someone who makes music is called a musician
What is music?
Music is sound that has been organized by using rhythm, melody or harmony. If someone bangs saucepans while cooking, it makes noise. If a person bangs saucepans or pots in a rhythmic way, they are making a simple type of music.
There are four things which music has most of the time:
Definitions.
There is no simple definition of music which covers all cases. It is an art form, and opinions come into play. Music is whatever people think is music. A different approach is to list the qualities music must have, such as, sound which has rhythm, melody, pitch, timbre, etc.
These and other attempts, do not capture all aspects of music, or leave out examples which definitely are music. According to Thomas Clifton, music is "a certain reciprocal relation established between a person, his behavior, and a sounding object".p10 Musical experience and the music, together, are called phenomena, and the activity of describing phenomena is called phenomenology.
History.
Even in the stone age people made music. The first music was probably made trying to imitate sounds and rhythms that occurred naturally. Human music may echo these phenomena using patterns, repetition and tonality. This kind of music is still here today. Shamans sometimes imitate sounds that are heard in nature. It may also serve as entertainment (games), or have practical uses, like luring animals when hunting.
Some animals also can use music. Songbirds use song to protect their territory, or to attract a mate. Monkeys have been seen beating hollow logs. This may, of course, also serve to defend the territory.
The first musical instrument used by humans was probably the voice. The human voice can make many different kinds of sounds. The larynx (voice box) is like a wind instrument.
The oldest known Neanderthal hyoid bone with the modern human form was found in 1983, indicating that the Neanderthals had language, because the hyoid supports the voice box in the human throat.
Most likely the first rhythm instruments or percussion instruments involved the clapping of hands, stones hit together, or other things that are useful to keep a beat. There are finds of this type that date back to the paleolithic. Some of these are ambiguous, as they can be used either as a tool or a musical instrument.
The first flutes.
The oldest flute ever discovered may be the so-called Divje Babe flute, found in the Slovenian cave Divje Babe I in 1995. It is not certain that the object is really a flute. The item in question is a fragment of the femur of a young cave bear, and has been dated to about 43,000 years ago. However, whether it is truly a musical instrument or simply a carnivore-chewed bone is a matter of ongoing debate.
In 2008, archaeologists discovered a bone flute in the Hohle Fels cave near Ulm, Germany.
 The five-holed flute has a V-shaped mouthpiece and is made from a vulture wing bone. The researchers involved in the discovery officially published their findings in the journal "Nature", in June 2009. The discovery is also the oldest confirmed find of any musical instrument in history. Other flutes were also found in the cave. This flute was found next to the Venus of Hohle Fels and a short distance from the oldest known human carving. 
When they announced their discovery, the scientists suggested that the "finds demonstrate the presence of a well-established musical tradition at the time when modern humans colonized Europe".
The oldest known wooden pipes were discovered near Greystones, Ireland, in 2004. A wood-lined pit contained a group of six flutes made from yew wood, between 30 and 50 cm long, tapered at one end, but without any finger holes. They may once have been strapped together.
In 1986 several bone flutes were found in Jiahu in Henan Province, China. They date to about 6,000 BC. They have between 5 and 8 holes each and were made from the hollow bones of a bird, the Red-crowned Crane. At the time of the discovery, one was found to be still playable. The bone flute plays both the five- or seven-note scale of Xia Zhi and six-note scale of Qing Shang of the ancient Chinese musical system.
Ancient times.
It is not known what the earliest music of the cave people was like. Some architecture, even some paintings, are thousands of years old, but old music could not survive until people learned to write it down. The only way we can guess about early music is by looking at very old paintings that show people playing musical instruments, or by finding them in archaeological digs (digging under the ground to find old things). The earliest piece of music that was ever written down and that has not been lost was discovered on a tablet written in Hurrian, a language spoken in and around northern Mesopotamia (where Iraq is today), from about 1500 BC.
Middle Ages.
Another early piece of written music that has survived was a round called "Sumer Is Icumen In". It was written down by a monk around the year 1250. Much of the music in the Middle Ages (roughly 450-1420) was folk music played by working people who wanted to sing or dance. When people played instruments, they were usually playing for dancers. However, most of the music that was written down was for the Catholic church. This music was written for monks to sing in church. It is called Chant (or Gregorian chant).
Renaissance.
In the Renaissance (roughly 1400-1550) there was a lot of music, and many composers wrote music that has survived so that it can be performed, played or sung today. The name for this period (Renaissance) is a French word which means "rebirth". This period was called the "rebirth" because many new types of art and music were reborn during this time.
Some very beautiful music was written for use in church services (sacred music) by the Italian composer Giovanni da Palestrina (1525-1594). In Palestrina's music, many singers sing together (this is called a choir). There was also plenty of music not written for the church, such as happy dance music and romantic love songs. Popular instruments during the Renaissance included the viols (a string instrument played with a bow), lutes (a plucked stringed instrument that is a little like a guitar), and the virginal, a small, quiet keyboard instrument.
Baroque.
In the arts, the Baroque was a Western cultural era, which began near the turn of the 17th century in Rome. It was exemplified by drama and grandeur in sculpture, painting, literature, dance, and music. In music, the term 'Baroque' applies to the final period of dominance of imitative counterpoint, where different voices and instruments echo each other but at different pitches, sometimes inverting the echo, and even reversing thematic material.
The popularity and success of the Baroque style was encouraged by the Roman Catholic Church which had decided at the time of the Council of Trent that the arts should communicate religious themes in direct and emotional involvement. The upper class also saw the dramatic style of Baroque architecture and art as a means of impressing visitors and expressing triumphant power and control. Baroque palaces are built around an entrance of courts, grand staircases and reception rooms of sequentially increasing opulence. In similar profusions of detail, art, music, architecture, and literature inspired each other in the Baroque cultural movement as artists explored what they could create from repeated and varied patterns. Some traits and aspects of Baroque paintings that differentiate this style from others are the abundant amount of details, often bright polychromy, less realistic faces of subjects, and an overall sense of awe, which was one of the goals in Baroque art.
The word baroque probably derives from the ancient Portuguese noun "barroco" which is a pearl that is not round but of unpredictable and elaborate shape. Hence, in informal usage, the word baroque can simply mean that something is "elaborate", with many details, without reference to the Baroque styles of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
Classical period.
In western music, the classical period means music from about 1750 to 1825. It was the time of composers like Joseph Haydn, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, and Ludwig van Beethoven. Orchestras became bigger, and composers often wrote longer pieces of music called symphonies that had several sections (called movements). Some movements of a symphony were loud and fast; other movements were quiet and sad. The form of a piece of music was very important at this time. Music had to have a nice 'shape'. They often used a structure which was called sonata form.
Another important type of music was the string quartet, which is a piece of music written for two violins, a viola, and a violoncello. Like symphonies, string quartet music had several sections. Haydn, Mozart and Beethoven each wrote many famous string quartets.
The piano was invented during this time. Composers liked the piano, because it could be used to play dynamics (getting louder or getting softer). Other popular instruments included the violin, the violoncello, the flute, the clarinet, and the oboe.
Romantic period.
The 19th century is called the Romantic period. Composers were particularly interested in conveying their emotions through music. An important instrument from the Romantic period was the piano. Some composers, such as Frederic Chopin wrote subdued, expressive, quietly emotional piano pieces. Often music described a feeling or told a story using sounds. Other composers, such as Franz Schubert wrote songs for a singer and a piano player called Lied (the German word for "song"). These Lieder (plural of Lied) told stories by using the lyrics (words) of the song and by the imaginative piano accompaniments. Other composers, like Richard Strauss, and Franz Liszt created narratives and told stories using only music, which is called a tone poem. Composers, such as Franz Liszt and Johannes Brahms used the piano to play loud, dramatic, strongly emotional music.
Many composers began writing music for bigger orchestras, with as many as 100 instruments. It was the period of "Nationalism" (the feeling of being proud of one's country) when many composers made music using folksong or melodies from their country. Lots of famous composers lived at this time such as Franz Schubert, Felix Mendelssohn, Frederic Chopin, Johannes Brahms, Pyotr Tchaikovsky and Richard Wagner.
Modern times.
From about 1900 onwards is called the "modern period". Many 20th century composers wanted to compose music that sounded different from the Classical and Romantic music. Modern composers searched for new ideas, such as using new instruments, different forms, different sounds, or different harmonies.
The composer Arnold Schoenberg (1874-1951) wrote pieces which were atonal (meaning that they did not sound as if they were in any clear musical key). Later, Schoenberg invented a new system for writing music called twelve-tone system. Music written with the twelve-tone system sounds strange to some, but is mathematical in nature, often making sense only after careful study. Pure twelve-tone music was popular among academics in the fifties and sixties, but some composers such as Benjamin Britten use it today, when it is necessary to get a certain feel.
One of the most important 20th-century composers, Igor Stravinsky (1882-1971), wrote music with very complicated (difficult) chords (groups of notes that are played together) and rhythms. Some composers thought music was getting too complicated and so they wrote Minimalist pieces which use very simple ideas. In the 1950s and 1960s, composers such as Karlheinz Stockhausen experimented with electronic music, using electronic circuits, amplifiers and loudspeakers. In the 1970s, composers began using electronic synthesizers and musical instruments from rock and roll music, such as the electric guitar. They used these new instruments to make new sounds.
Composers writing in the 1990s and the 2000s, such as John Adams (born 1947) and James MacMillan (born 1959) often use a mixture of all these ideas, but they like to write tonal music with easy tunes as well.
These days many new artists have come up such as Bruno Mars, Adam Levine, Taylor Swift, Charli XCX and many more constantly changing the face of the modern day music with songs like Gorilla, Maps, Break the Rules, Blank Space and many more.
Electronic music.
Music can be produced electronically. This is most commonly done by computers, keyboards, electric guitars and disk tables. They can mimic traditional instruments, and also produce very different sounds. 21st-century electronic music is commonly made with computer programs and hardware mixers.
Jazz.
Jazz is a type of music that was invented around 1900 in New Orleans in the south of the USA. There were many black musicians living there who played a style of music called blues music. Blues music was influenced by African music (because the black people in the United States had come to the United States as slaves. They were taken from Africa by force). Blues music was a music that was played by singing, using the harmonica, or the acoustic guitar. Many blues songs had sad lyrics about sad emotions (feelings) or sad experiences, such as losing a job, a family member dying, or having to go to jail (prison).
Jazz music mixed together blues music with European music. Some black composers such as Scott Joplin were writing music called ragtime, which had a very different rhythm from standard European music, but used notes that were similar to some European music. Ragtime was a big influence on early jazz, called Dixieland jazz. Jazz musicians used instruments such as the trumpet, saxophone, and clarinet were used for the tunes (melodies), drums for percussion and plucked double bass, piano, banjo and guitar for the background rhythm (rhythmic section). Jazz is usually improvised: the players make up (invent) the music as they play. Even though jazz musicians are making up the music, jazz music still has rules; the musicians play a series of chords (groups of notes) in order.
Jazz music has a swinging rhythm. The word "swing" is hard to explain. For a rhythm to be a "swinging rhythm" it has to feel natural and relaxed. Swing rhythm is not even like a march. There is a long-short feel instead of a same-same feel. A "swinging rhythm" also gets the people who are listening excited, because they like the sound of it. Some people say that a "swinging rhythm" happens when all the jazz musicians start to feel the same pulse and energy from the song. If a jazz band plays very well together, people will say "that is a swinging jazz band" or "that band really swings well."
Jazz influenced other types of music like the Western art music from the 1920s and 1930s. Art music composers such as George Gershwin wrote music that was influenced by jazz. Jazz music influenced pop music songs. In the 1930s and 1940s, many pop music songs began using chords or melodies from jazz songs. One of the best known jazz musicians was Louis Armstrong (1900-1971).
Pop music.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : Pop music
"Pop" music is a type of "popular" music that many people like to listen to. The term "pop music" can be used for all kinds of music that was written to be popular. The word "pop music" was used from about 1880 onwards, when a type of music called music was popular.
Modern pop music grew out of 1950s rock and roll, (for example Chuck Berry, Bo Diddley and Little Richard) and rockabilly (for example Elvis Presley and Buddy Holly). In the 1960s, The Beatles became a famous pop music group. In the 1970s, other styles of music were mixed with pop music, such as funk and soul music. Pop music generally has a heavy (strong) beat, so that it is good for dancing. Pop singers normally sing with microphones that are plugged into an amplifier and a loudspeaker.
Musical notation.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : Musical notation
"Musical notation" is the way music is written down. Music needs to be written down in order to be saved and remembered for future performances. In this way composers (people who write music) can tell others how to play the musical piece as it was meant to be played.
Solfège.
Solfège (also called solfa) is the way tones are named. It was made in order to give a name to the several tones and pitches. For example, the eight basic notes "Do, Re, Mi, Fa, So, La, Ti, Do" are just the names of the eight notes that confirm the major scale.
Written music.
Music can be written in several ways. When it is written on a staff (like in the example shown), the pitches (tones) and their duration are represented by symbols called notes. Notes are to put on the lines and in the spaces between the lines. Each position says which tone must be played. The higher the note is in the staff, the higher the pitch of the tone. The lower the notes are, the lower the pitch. The duration of the notes (how long they are played for) is shown by making the note "heads" black or white, and by giving them stems and flags.
Music can also be written with letters, naming them as in the solfa "Do, Re, Mi, Fa, So, La, Ti, Do" or representing them by letters. The next table shows how each note of the solfa is represented in the Standard Notation:
The Standard Notation was made to simplify the lecture of music notes, although it is mostly used to represent chords and the names of the music scales.
These ways to represent music ease the way a person reads music. There are more ways to write and represent music, but they are less known and may be more complicated.
How to enjoy music.
By listening.
People can enjoy music by listening to it. They can go to concerts to hear musicians perform. Classical music is usually performed in concert halls, but sometimes huge festivals are organized in which it is performed outside, in a field or stadium, like pop festivals. People can listen to music on CDs, Computers, iPods, television, the radio, cassette/record-players and even mobile phones.
There is so much music today, in elevators, shopping malls, and stores, that it often becomes a background sound that we do not really hear. Sometimes it is good to listen more closely to music: by trying to hear the different instruments and what types of notes the instruments are playing.
By playing or singing.
People can learn to play an instrument. Probably the most comon for complete beginners is the piano or keyboard, the guitar, or the recorder (which is certainly the cheapest to buy). After they have learnt to play scales, play simple tunes and read the simplest musical notation, then they can think about which instrument for further development. They should choose an instrument that is practical for their size. For example, a very short child cannot play a full size double bass, because the double bass is over five feet high. People should choose an instrument that they enjoy playing, because playing regularly is the only way to get better. Finally, it helps to have a good teacher.
By composing.
Anyone can make up his or her own pieces of music. It is not difficult to compose simple songs or melodies (tunes). It's easier for people who can play an instrument themselves. All it takes is experimenting with the sounds that an instrument makes. Someone can make up a piece that tells a story, or just find a nice tune and think about ways it can be changed each time it is repeated. The instrument might be someone's own voice.
Other websites.
 Find more information on Music by searching one of Wikipedia's :
 Dictionary definitions from Wiktionary<br>
 from Wikibooks<br>
 from Wikiquote<br>
 from Wikisource<br>
 from Commons<br>
 from Wikinews<br>
 from Wikiversity<br>
 from Wikispecies<br>
 from Wikidata<br>
 from MediaWiki

</doc>
<doc id="473" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=473" title="Madrid">
Madrid

Madrid (pronounced: “mah-DRID” or /məˈdrɪd/) is the capital and largest city of Spain. The capital used to be Toledo until 1561.
Madrid is in the middle of Spain, in the Community of Madrid. The Community is a large area that includes the city as well as small towns and villages outside the city. 7 million people live in the Community. More than 3 million live in the city itself. It is the largest city of Spain and, at 655 m (2,100 ft) above sea level, the highest capital of any European country. It is the third largest city in the European Union. It has two footballs teams, Real Madrid and Atlético Madrid.
Madrid was ruled by the Romans from the 2nd century. After AD 711 it was occupied by the Moors. In 1083 Spain was ruled again by Spaniards. Catholic kings ruled the country. By the mid-16th century it had become the capital of a very large empire. Spain was ruled by monarchs from the House of Habsburg, then the House of Bourbon. After the Spanish Civil War it was ruled by a dictator until the mid-1970s when it became a democracy.
As it is the capital city, Madrid is where the monarch lives and also where the government meets.
Madrid is the financial centre of Spain. Many large businesses have their main offices there.
Although it is a modern city, a lot of its history can be seen and felt as one walks along the streets and in the large squares of the city. There are beautiful parks, famous buildings, art galleries and concert halls. The summer months are very hot and the winter months are very cold.
History.
During the history of Spain many different people have lived there. The Phoenicians came in 1100 BC, followed by Carthaginians, Romans, Vandals, Visigoths and Moors. It was not until 1492, when the Catholic Monarchs got power, that Spain became a united country. Jews and Moors, who had lived happily there for many years, were driven away. Spain became very rich because it conquered many overseas countries, especially in Central and South America. However, Spain fought many wars and lost much of its treasure. It was very poor in 1936 when the Civil War was fought. General Franco became a harsh dictator until 1975 when Juan Carlos I was brought back to Spain and made king. There is now a democratic government.
In prehistoric times people lived in the area which is now Madrid. The Romans lived there for several centuries. The origin of today’s city really starts in the 9th century when Muhammad I had a small palace built where the Palacio Real stands today. The Moors built strong forts in Madrid in 865 and put a wall round the city. These walls stood until 1476 when they were knocked down. In 1561 Felipe I moved the royal court from Toledo to Madrid. Madrid had now become the capital of a very large empire. Over the next years and decades the Plaza Mayor was built and many great buildings and monuments, many of which still stand.
When Ferdinand II of Aragon and Queen Isabella of Castile came to Madrid, Spain had become a very rich country. The 16th and 17th centuries are now known as the “Golden Century”. Their grandson was the famous Charles I of Spain (also known as Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor). He liked his court to be in Seville. His son, Philip II (1527–1598) moved the court to Madrid in 1561. 
In the late 1800s there was a revolt, known as the First Spanish Republic. Later the monarchy was restored, but then there was a Second Spanish Republic followed by the Spanish Civil War. The Second Spanish Republic started on 14 April 1931 and was celebrated in La puerta del Sol which is the center of the city. Madrid suffered a lot in this war. It was bombed by airplanes.
During the dictatorship of Francisco Franco, especially during the 1960s, the south of Madrid became very industrialized, and many people from the rural areas moved to Madrid especially to the south east of the city.
When General Franco had died and democracy was restored, Madrid became more prosperous. During the 1980s and 1990s many new buildings were put up.
Geography.
The region of Madrid has quite a dry climate. Most rain falls in autumn and spring. The winters are cold because it is so high up, and sometimes there is snow. The summers are hot. Often the temperature is above 30 °C (86 °F) in July and can often reach 40 °C (104 °F). At night it is much cooler. This is why people have a sleep (siesta) in the afternoon when it is too hot to do anything. Then they come out again in the evening and often eat dinner late at night.
Famous buildings in Madrid.
Spain's Royal Palace is in Madrid. It is one of the largest palaces in all of Western Europe. But the king and his family do not live there anymore; they live in a smaller palace, and only use the Royal Palace for important events, like meeting other kings and other official ceremonies. One can go inside the Royal Palace and learn about the history of Spanish monarchy.
Other famous buildings are: The Prado Museum, the Temple of Debod, the Santiago Bernabeú Stadium and the Cuatro Torres Business Area.
Art galleries.
There are a lot of very big and important art museums in Madrid. The most famous ones are the Prado Museum, the Queen Sofia Museum, and the Thyssen-Bornemisza museum. These show off paintings, sculptures, and other works of art from some of the most famous artists in the world.
Many famous, important, and valuable works of art are in these museums. For example, the Queen Sofia museum has a famous painting by Pablo Picasso, called "Guernica". Picasso painted this painting to show how sad and angry it made him when the German Nazis destroyed a town in Spain called Guernica in 1937. Picasso had said that the painting should never return to Spain until it was a democracy again. Once that happened, they built the Queen Sofia museum just to have a good place to put it.
Other famous sights.
There are many other sights to see in Madrid. Many people go to see the Plaza Mayor which was a market place. The Plaza de la Villa was another famous market place. There are a lot of shops along the Gran Via. Real Madrid football fans celebrate at the Plaza de Cibeles. Two famous gates to see are the Puerta del Sol and the Puerta de Alcalá. A more recent landmark is the Almudena Cathedral.
Madrid has some lovely parks. The Retiro Park is the most famous. The Cristal Palace can be found in this park.
The Plaza de Toros is visited by many tourists. Many madrileños (people from Madrid) enjoy bullfights there.
One of the most recent sites built in Madrid is the KIO Towers. These are also known as the Gateway to Europe.

</doc>
<doc id="474" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=474" title="Montreal">
Montreal

Montreal (, spelled "Montréal" in French) is a city in the country of Canada. It is the largest city in the province of Quebec and the second-largest city in Canada. It is the second-largest French-speaking city in the world after Paris.
Montreal is built on an island sitting in the Saint Lawrence River. More than three million people live in the Montreal region. At the center of Montreal is a mountain called Mount Royal.
Most of the people who live in Montreal speak French, but English is commonly spoken as well as a second language.
History.
The name 'Montréal' comes from "Mont Royal", which means 'Royal Mountain' in French.
Montreal has always played a very important part in the history and development of Canada. It continues to be a large Canadian industrial and commercial center, as well as a major sea port (via the Saint Lawrence River). It once was the largest city in Canada, before Toronto grew to be larger.
Tourists visit Montreal for its historical and cultural interest. One can visit the Old City in horse-drawn carriages, where many buildings from the earliest years stand and remind of the way of life that started in the New World, when Montreal was just a fur trading outpost belonging to France over 350 years ago.
Geography.
Montreal is in the southwest of Quebec, 530 kilometres north of New York City. The city itself is located on an island, the Island of Montreal. Near the downtown area, there is a hill called "Mount Royal" ("Mont Royal" in French).
Economy.
Montreal's economy is the second largest in Canada. The city's port is the biggest inland port (a port that is not on the sea) in the world. Many large corporations have their main offices in Montreal. It also hosts many international organizations like ICAO, the World Anti-Doping Agency, and IATA. The city is home to four major Universities, welcoming students from all parts of Canada and from all over the world.
Montreal is also known for its cultural production sector. Because the city has many different buildings, movies are easy to film there. The circus troupe (group) "Cirque du Soleil" is from Montreal. The city is also known for its festivals, like the Montreal Jazz Festival and "Just For Laughs".
Some video game companies also have studios in Montreal.
Culture.
Montreal has many beautiful churches (Montreal is referred to locally as 'the city of a hundred churches'), including the largest church in Canada, and also many important art, history, and science museums. You can also visit the location of the 1967 World's Fair, where today, as well as many other attractions, one will find the Circuit Gilles Villeneuve Formula One automobile race course. Also of interest is the site where the 1976 Summer Olympic Games were held, and the modern architecture of the Olympic stadium (the 'Big O') and its tall inclined observation tower (the highest inclined tower in the world); now a landmark of Montreal.
A lot of Montrealers are interested in hockey, and Montreal is home to its own ice hockey team called the Montreal Canadiens who play in the National Hockey League (NHL).

</doc>
<doc id="476" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=476" title="Macadamia nut">
Macadamia nut

The macadamia nut is the fruit of a tree that first came from the east coast of Australia. There is 
more than one kind of Macadamia tree. Only one kind is grown for food.
The tree is an evergreen (stays green all year long). It grows up to 25 ft high. It has groups of small white flowers. It grows best in subtropical (wet and always warm) climates. It needs well-drained soil (water can flow away easily) and 40 to of rain a year.
The nutmeat (the soft part inside the shell that can be eaten) is mostly a creamy white color. Sometimes it looks a bit yellow. It has a flavor that many people like. Macadamias are eaten roasted (cooked) by themselves. They are used in cookies, cakes, pastries, and candies. People use them like almonds and cashews as part of cooked meals. This is an Oriental style of cooking.
The first commercial orchard was started in Australia in the late 1880s. Commercial production started in Hawaii during the 1920s. Production later spread to California, Mexico, and other places with warm climate.
Macadamias are poisonous to dogs. A dog usually needs 24 to 48 hours to recover fully after eating macadamias.

</doc>
<doc id="477" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=477" title="Maui">
Maui

Maui is the second largest of the Hawaiian Islands, in the United States.
It has a population of just over 100,000 and is 727 square miles (1883 km²) in size. Maui is part of Maui County, Hawaii. The larger (or better known) towns include Kahului, Wailuku, Lahaina, Hana, and Wailea. Main industries are agriculture and tourism.
Maui was named for the demi-god Maui. In Hawaiian legend, he raised all the islands from the sea. Maui is also known as the "Valley Isle" for the large fertile isthmus (narrow land connection) between two volcanoes.
Maui is a volcanic doublet: an island formed from two volcanic mountains that are joined together. The older volcano, Mauna Kahalawai, is much older and has been very worn down. In common talk it is called the West Maui Mountain. The larger volcano, Haleakala, rises above 10,000 feet (3,050 m). The last eruption of Haleakala happened over 200 years ago, and this lava flow can be seen between Ahihi Bay and La Perouse Bay on the southeast shore. 
Other places on Maui popular with visitors include: 
Golf courses on Maui include:

</doc>
<doc id="478" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=478" title="Molokai">
Molokai

Molokai (or Molokaʻi) is the fifth largest island in the U.S. Hawaiian Islands. The island is 38 miles long and 10 miles across. Its land area is 261 square miles. The highest mountain is named Kamakou, and it is 4,970 feet (1,514 meters) high. 
'Moloka'i is nicknamed "The Friendly Isle". It is one of the least developed of the Hawaiian islands.
The only big town is named Kaunakakai, which is also the main or chief port on the island. The airport is on West Moloka'i. Also on the island is Kalaupapa, which is a place for people who have a diease called leprosy. 
Moloka'i has many Hawaiian fish ponds along its south shore. Many of these have been cleaned and fixed.
 "This about a  can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="479" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=479" title="Money">
Money

Euro banknotes
A Krugerrand is a South African gold coin
Money is what people use to buy things and services. Money is what many people take for selling their own things or services. There are many kinds of money in the world. Most countries have their own kind of money, such as the United States dollar or the British pound. Money is also called many other names, like currency or cash. Most of the time a state or a government prints paper money and makes coins at a mint.
History of money.
The idea of bartering things is very old. A long time ago, people did not buy or sell with money. Instead, they traded one thing for another to get what they wanted or needed. One person who owned many cows could trade with another person who owned much wheat. Each would trade a little of what he had with the other. This would support the people on his farm. Other things that were easier to carry around than cows also came to be held as valuable. This gave rise to trade items such as jewelry and spices. 
When people changed from trading in things like cows and wheat to using money instead, they needed things that would last a long time. They must still have a known value, and could be carried around. The first country in the world to make metal coins was called Lydia. These first appeared during the 7th century BC, in the western part of what is now Turkey. The Lydian coins were made of a weighed amount of precious metal and were stamped with a picture of a lion. This idea soon spread to Greece, the rest of the Mediterranean, and the rest of the world. Coins were all made to the same size and shape. In some parts of the world, different things have been used as money, like clam shells or blocks of salt.
Besides being easier to carry than cows, using money had many other advantages. Money is "easier to divide" than many trade goods. If someone own cows, and wants to trade for only "half a cow's worth" of wheat, he probably does not want to cut his cow in half. But if he sells his cow for money, and buys wheat with money, he can get exactly the amount he wants.
Cows die, and wheat rots. But money "lasts longer" than most trade goods. If someone sells a cow for money, he can save that money away until he needs it. He can always leave it to his children when he dies. It can last a very long time, and he can use it at any time.
Not every cow is as good as another cow. Some cows are sick and old, and others are healthy and young. Some wheat is good and other wheat is moldy or stale. So if a person trades cows for wheat, he might have a hard time arguing over how much wheat each cow is worth. However, money is "standard". That means one dollar is worth the same as another dollar. It is easier to add up and count money, than to add up the value of different cows or amounts of wheat. 
Later, after coins had been used for hundreds of years, paper money started out as a promise to pay in coin, much like an "I.O.U." note. The first true paper money was used in China in the 10th century AD. Paper money was also printed in Sweden between 1660 and 1664. Both times, it did not work well, and had to be stopped because the banks kept running out of coins to pay on the notes. Massachusetts Bay Colony printed paper money in the 1690s. This time, the use became more common.
Today, most of what people think of as money is not even things you can hold. It is numbers in bank accounts, saved in computer memories. Many people still feel more comfortable using coins and paper, and do not totally trust using electronic money on a computer memory.
Kinds of money.
Many types of money have been used at different times in history. These are:
"Commodity money" can be used for other purposes besides serving as a medium of exchange. We say it possesses intrinsic value, because it is useful or valuable by itself. Some examples of commodity money are cattle, silk, gold and silver. Convertible paper money is money that is convertible into gold and silver. Gold and Silver certificates are convertible paper money as they can be fully convertible into gold and silver. 
Inconvertible money is money that cannot be converted into gold and silver. Notes and coins are inconvertible money. They are inconvertible and are declared by the government money. Such fiat money is a country's legal tender. Today, notes and coins are the currencies used in bank deposits. 
Types of bank deposits:

</doc>
<doc id="482" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=482" title="Multiplication">
Multiplication

Multiplication is an arithmetic operation for finding the "product" of two numbers.
Multiplication is the third operation in maths after addition which is the first, subtraction which is the second and then there is multiplication.
With natural numbers, it tells you the number of tiles in a rectangle where one of the two numbers equals the number of tiles on one side and the other number equals the number of tiles on the other side.
With real numbers, it tells you the area of a rectangle where the first number equals the size of one side and the second number equals the size of the other side.
For example, three multiplied by five is the total of five threes added together, or the total of three fives. This can be written down as 3 × 5 = 15, or spoken as "three times five equals fifteen." Mathematicians call the two numbers you wish to multiply "coefficients" together, or "multiplicand" and "multiplicator" separately. Multiplicand × multiplicator = product.
Multiplication between numbers is said to be commutative- when the order of the numbers does not influence the value of the product. This is true for the Integers (whole numbers), e.g. 4 × 6 is the same as 6 × 4, and also for the Rational numbers (fractions), and for all the other Real numbers (representable as a field in the continuous line), and also for Complex numbers (numbers representable as a field in the plane). It is not true for quaternions (numbers representable as a ring in the four-dimensional space), vectors or matrices.
The definition of multiplication as repeated addition provides a way to arrive at a set-theoretic interpretation of multiplication of cardinal numbers. A more accurate representation is to think of it as scaling quantities. This animation illustrates 3 being multiplied by 2, giving 6 as a result. Notice that the blue dot in the blue segment of length 3 is placed at position 1, and the blue segment is scaled so that this dot is placed at the end of the red segment, of length 2. For multiplication by any X, the blue dot will always start at 1 and end at X. This works even for X smaller than 1, or negative.
The opposite of multiplication is division.
Multiplication table.
Teachers usually require his pupils to memorize the table of the first 9 numbers when teaching multiplication.

</doc>
<doc id="483" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=483" title="Microsoft">
Microsoft

Coordinates: 
Microsoft Corporation (NASDAQ:) is a company that makes computer software and video games for users around the world. Bill Gates and Paul Allen started the company in 1975. Microsoft makes Windows, Microsoft Office (including Microsoft Word), Edge, MSN and the Xbox One, among others. Most Microsoft programs cannot be downloaded for free - people have to buy them in a shop or online. Some products (like the Windows operating system) are often already installed when people buy a new computer.
Software.
Microsoft Windows is an operating system, which means that it is the basic software that makes people's computers work and lets other programs work. Most computers, including mobile devices, have some kind of operating system. The majority of desktop and laptop computers run Windows, and so do some tablet computers and a few smartphones. The latest version of Windows is Windows 10. 
Microsoft Office is an office suite. It lets people write documents on their computer with Microsoft Word, make charts and graphs with Microsoft Excel and make presentations with Microsoft PowerPoint.
Internet Explorer is a piece of software that lets people look at things online (known as browsing) and download things from the Internet. 
Microsoft also makes other programs for the Internet. Many of them are called Windows Live services, with the name Windows Live put in front of the old name of the service, like Windows Live Hotmail, which is an email service. However, the Windows Live name is not being used much anymore. Microsoft runs a service called Bing on the internet which lets people search for things like photos or information online.
MS-DOS is the first existing operating system developed by Microsoft, used for primitive computers and terminals.
Microsoft Sharepoint is a server tool included in Microsoft Office (2007, 2013).
Microsoft Expression series is a web development tool which is now discontinued.
Minecraft and many other programs have been bought by Microsoft and developed further.
Services and hardware.
Skype is also a service by Microsoft. It was not started by Microsoft, but was later purchased by Microsoft. Skype is a free program that lets people call other people, either through the telephone, or through Skype on the other person's computer.
The Xbox, the Xbox 360 and the new Xbox One are video game consoles, which means they let people play video games when connected to their televisions. Microsoft is one of the three big companies that make video game consoles. The other two are Nintendo and Sony. Xbox Live is a service that lets people play online against other people anywhere in the world. Microsoft also makes many PC games.
Microsoft also has many other small products such as tablet computers and computer peripherals including mice and keyboards that are used with computers. The Microsoft Surface is an example, which is a laptop/tablet convertible. 

</doc>
<doc id="485" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=485" title="Islamic world">
Islamic world

Template codice_1 has been incorrectly substituted.
The Islamic World consists of all people who are in Islam. It is not an exact location, but rather a community. When they do things together as Muslims, they are the "umma", which means "community" referring to all of the believers. The faith emphasizes unity and defense of fellow Muslims, so it is common for these nations to cooperate. Recent conflicts in the Muslim World have sometimes spread because of this desire to cooperate (see below). It is also likely that some have been made shorter and less damaging because of it. Some might even have never started.
Demographics.
Muslims are in many countries. In 52 nations, Muslims are the majority. Almost all are Sunni. They speak about 60 languages and come from all ethnic backgrounds. 
34.6 million Muslims in Somalia
Media.
The "Al-Jazeera" satellite TV network in the Arabic language is a news source many Muslims watch.
In most Muslim nations, the government is the main source of news. This sometimes makes it very difficult or dangerous to make anti-government statements.
There are, however, many other news programmes and websites in the Muslim world.
Islam in law and ethics.
Islamic law exists in many variations - in Arabic it is called shariah - five schools of which were created centuries ago. These are the classical fiqh: the Hanafi school from India, Pakistan and Bangaladesh, West Africa, Egypt, the Maliki in North Africa and West Africa, the Shafi in Malaysia and Indonesia, the Hanbali in Arabia, and Jaferi in Iran and Iraq - where the majority is Shia. All five are very old and many Muslims feel a new fiqh must be created for modern society. Islam has a method for doing this, al-urf and ijtihad are the words to describe this method, but they have not been used in a long time, and few people are trusted enough to use them to make new laws.
So, in most of the Muslim world, people are very conservative, especially about alcohol, adultery, abortion and women working in jobs where they are used to lure customers.
Muslim women often dress extremely modestly, and many do so by choice. But in some countries they have been forced to do so against their will. This is one of the things that causes tension between the Western World and that of Muslims.
Islamic economics bans debt but in most Muslim countries Western banking is allowed. This is another issue that many Muslims have with the Western world.
Islam in politics.
One quarter of the world population share Islam as an ethical tradition. 
Many people in these countries also see Islam as a political movement. In democratic countries there is usually at least one Islamic party.
Political Islam is powerful in all Muslim-majority countries. Islamic parties in Pakistan and Algeria have taken power. 
Many in these movements call themselves Islamists, which also sometimes describes more militant Islamic groups. The relationships between these groups and their views of democracy are complex.
Some of these groups are called terrorists because they attack civilians of other non-Muslim nations, to make a political point.
Conflicts with Israel and the US.
Israel is very unpopular in the Muslim world, because of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the way that the state of Israel came into being in 1948 which many Arabs thought was unfair.
Some Muslims see this as a fight against Judaism or Jews, but not all. In Morocco for instance, the Islamists recently invited Jews to join the party. Jewish groups also cooperate with Arabs in the West Bank, where Neturei Karta (anti-Zionist orthodox Jewish) leader Rabbi Mosche Hirsch served as the Minister for Jewish Affairs in the Fatah before there was a Palestinian Authority. Like the Arabs, this small group of Jews thought the way Israel was created was not right. However, very few Jews believe this, and most support Israel as a state.
In 1979 there was a big shift in the way the Muslim world dealt with the rest of the world. In that year, Egypt made peace with Israel, Iran became an Islamic state after a revolution, and there was an invasion of Afghanistan by the Soviet Union. A lot of things changed in that year. By 2001 the Soviet Union was gone, Jordan had also made peace with Israel, and on September 11, 2001 there were major attacks on the U.S. - which most people believe were made to drive the United States out of the Muslim world, especially Saudi Arabia. In many ways the events of 1979 led to the events of 2001.
The 2001 invasion of Afghanistan and 2003 invasion of Iraq are called part of a War on Terrorism by the United States. Many or most Muslims see it as a War on Islam. After the invasion, the Islamic parties won more seats, and a majority of Muslims polled in many nations expressed support for Osama bin Laden and said he would "do the right thing". Olivier Roy is a French scholar who thinks that this does not express support for al-Qaeda or militant Islam but opposing colonialism and what many Muslims call racism - favourable treatment for Jews especially those living in West Bank settlements, many of whom have American or British passport, and which the United Nations says have no right to live there.
The situation is very complicated and there are many different views of it.
Organization.
The Organization of Islamic Conference formed in 1969 lets the Muslim nations work as a group. Russia joined in 2003.
The Arab League is a smaller group of only the Arab countries.
OPEC is another forum where issues between the Muslim and non-Muslim world come up. In 1973 to protest U.S. support for Israel there was an oil embargo which caused the 1973 energy crisis.

</doc>
<doc id="487" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=487" title="Multiverse">
Multiverse

!style=" text-align: left; background: #DCF0FF;"|Structure Formation
!style=" text-align: left; background: #DCF0FF;"|Components
!style=" text-align: left; background: #DCF0FF;"|Timeline
!style=" text-align: left; background: #DCF0FF;"|Experiments
!style=" text-align: left; background: #DCF0FF;"|Scientists
A multiverse (or meta-universe) is the theory of a set of multiple possible universes, including our universe, which make up reality. These universes are sometimes called parallel universes. A number of different versions have been considered. They all have the same weakness: there is no known way these ideas can be tested.
You can think of universes as "bubbles". When two of these "bubbles" collide they may have caused the big bang. They can also separate to form two smaller universes.
The term "multiverse" was coined by psychologist William James.
References.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="490" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=490" title="Mechanistic paradigm">
Mechanistic paradigm

Template codice_1 has been incorrectly substituted.
The mechanistic paradigm, also known as the Newtonian paradigm, assumes that things in the environment around humans are more like machines than like life. It was more common in the 19th century. This is a set of loosely related beliefs that affects all sciences:
Believers in this paradigm sometimes say that those who do not believe in it are following a cognitive paradigm - but almost no one uses this term, since it is redundant - cognitive science is already accepted as the most basic idea in the philosophy of science. But mechanists reject some of the ideas of cognitive scientists, like cognitive science of mathematics.
Mechanistic thinking also assumes that philosophy of perception is much less important than cognitive scientists say it is - that humans and their beliefs and equipment do not generally add a lot of bias to a scientific theory. Thomas Kuhn said otherwise, that these things matter, and that the major assumptions of science, can shift drastically. This he called a paradigm shift. The shift from mechanistic to cognitive paradigm is an example of this.
Later he used other words to describe the assumptions and beliefs, like mind-set, but the word "paradigm" is still used. Some say it is much over-used.
Economics is often said to "suffer from" assumptions of the mechanistic paradigm. Sometimes those who believe in neoclassical economics and also in the mechanistic paradigm say they "seek to unify physics and economics," as if people and particles behaved as two examples of the same kind of thing.
Technology is often easier to make if people accept a mechanistic paradigm - but it may be harder to say why it does not work, if one believes in these ideas. For instance, creating diagnostic trees might be easier if one works from experience, not from an idea of how a technology should or must work.
A controversial idea is that mechanistic ideas are just an older idea called scholasticism, with more mathematics. Both tried to work from what should or must be, instead of what experiment seemed to show.
Another controversial idea is that scientism, belief in science as if it were a religion or ethical tradition, comes from this paradigm. Most scientists who are mechanistic do not say they see science as a guide to ethics, but try to keep them separate.

</doc>
<doc id="495" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=495" title="MediaWiki">
MediaWiki

For the MediaWiki on Wikipedia, see .
MediaWiki is the name of the software that runs all of the Wikimedia projects. MediaWiki was released in 2003. The software is licensed under the GPL. This means it is free content, or open source.
MediaWiki is free server-based software which is licensed under the GNU General Public License (GPL). It is designed to be run on a large server farm for a website that gets millions of hits per day. MediaWiki is a very powerful, scalable software and a feature-rich wiki implementation, that uses PHP to process and display data stored in its MySQL database.
Pages use MediaWiki's Wikitext format, so that users without knowledge of XHTML or CSS can edit them easily.
When a user submits an edit to a page, MediaWiki writes it to the database, but without deleting the previous versions of the page, thus allowing easy reverts in case of vandalism or spamming. MediaWiki can manage image and multimedia files, too, which are stored in the filesystem. For large wikis with lots of users, MediaWiki supports caching and can be easily coupled with Squid proxy server software.
All Wikimedia projects run on MediaWiki version .
Usage.
As MediaWiki is more flexible, therefore many websites use MediaWiki rather than other types of wiki software. Besides Wikimedia, Wikia is also another company that uses MediaWiki greatly for people to contribute information.
There are also some websites that uses MediaWiki as a content management system.
Extensions.
In MediaWiki, a system administrator can choose to install extensions which are provided on the main MediaWiki website. Some are from the MediaWiki developers, while others are from programmers from all around the world.
Most extensions can be download from Wikimedia's Subversion repository. However, there are some other extensions that other people host themselves.
Some extensions had been added to the main software along the development of MediaWiki. For example, the extension is an extension to promote a user into an administrator or a bureaucrat.
There is a total of 2144 extensions as of December 1, 2012.
Namespaces.
In the default installation of MediaWiki, the software has 17 namespaces(18 actually, but one does not have a namespace), namely:
Additional namespaces can be added using the from the installation of MediaWiki.
Bugs.
As MediaWiki is a complex software, there would always be bugs in the software, especially for new extensions. Therefore, Wikimedia has created a bugzilla website for people who see a bug to tell the developers of MediaWiki.
Some extensions of MediaWiki use the , while some just use the talk pages of the extension page.
Skins.
During the development of MediaWiki, different skins have come into the main software. For example, Wikipedia used to be using Nostalgia. But it changed to Monobook before the new Vector skin came up in 1.16.
A survey done by Wikimedia showed that more people prefer the Vector skin.
It is possible to change the skin that a user wants to see a wiki as by going to their .
More information.
"More information about the software:"

</doc>
<doc id="497" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=497" title="First language">
First language

A first language (also mother tongue, native language, arterial language, or L1) is the language a person first learns. A person's first language helps them understand words and concepts in the style of that first language.
Terminology.
"First language" sometimes does not mean this, however.
Sometimes "first language" means the language a person speaks best (his second language is language he speaks less well than his first language, etc.).
Sometimes "first language", "second language" and "third language" show how well one speaks a language, so a person can have more than one first language or second language.
References.
 "This can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".</div >

</doc>
<doc id="500" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=500" title="Mustache">
Mustache

The hair that grows on the upper lip of some men is called a mustache. The hair that grows on the sides of the face and the chin of some men is called a beard. Some men have a lot of hair and a big mustache, and some have very little. In the modern world, many men shave part or all of their mustaches, or cut their mustache so it does not get very long. A chin beard with no mustache is called a goatee, whilst a chin beard with a mustache is known as a Van Dyke.
Mustache in United Kingdom and Commonwealth of Nations is spelled moustache.
Some animals such as walruses also have hair like this, and people sometimes also call this hair a mustache.
 "This can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".</div >

</doc>
<doc id="501" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=501" title="Mile">
Mile

A mile is a unit of length. There are many different kinds of mile but "mile" on its own usually means the "statute" mile. 
Statute mile.
In the US and the UK the word "mile" usually means the statute mile. 
Nautical mile.
The nautical mile is used for sea or air travel. 
The nautical mile was originally defined as one minute of arc along a line of longitude of the Earth. There are 60 minutes of arc in one degree or arc (60' = 1°). So there were 10,800 nautical miles from the North Pole to the South Pole.
Now the nautical mile is defined as 1,852 metres.
The speed of a ship that travels one nautical mile in one hour is called one knot
Roman mile.
The mile was first used by the Romans. It comes from the Latin phrase "mille passus" (plural: "milia passuum"). This means "one thousand paces". A pace is the distance each foot moves when taking one step.
Other miles.
Different miles have been used throughout history in various parts of the world. In Norway and Sweden, for example, a mil is a unit of length which is equal to 10 kilometres.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="504" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=504" title="Margarine">
Margarine

Margarine is an artificial butter. It can be made from vegetable oil, or animal fat. It may also contain skimmed milk, salt and emulsifiers. Margarine is used in many baked products. It contains less fat than butter, so is often chosen instead of it. There are also "low fat" margarines, which contain even less fat. However, many types of margarine contain trans fats, which are unhealthy and can cause heart disease. Other vegetables fats, like olive oil, are a better choice for cooking.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="505" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=505" title="Milky Way">
Milky Way

The Milky Way is our home galaxy. It contains over 200 billion stars, including our Sun. 
The Milky Way has a diameter of 100,000 light years, and is a barred spiral galaxy. The discovery of the Milky Way goes back to the Ancient Greek philosopher Democritus. The Milky Way has three main parts: a "disk", in which the Solar System resides, a "bulge" at the core, and an all encompassing "halo".
This galaxy belongs to the Local Group of three large galaxies and over 50 smaller galaxies. The Milky Way is one of the largest galaxies in the group, second to the Andromeda Galaxy. Milky Way's closest neighbour is Canis Major Dwarf, which is about 25,000 light years away from the Earth. The Andromeda Galaxy moves towards the Milky Way Galaxy, and will meet it in about 3.75 billion years. Andromeda Galaxy moves with a speed of about 1,800 kilometres per minute.
Size.
The stellar disk of the Milky Way Galaxy is approximately 100,000 light-years (9×1017 km) in diameter, and is considered to be, on average, about 1000 light years thick. 
It is estimated to contain at least 200 billion stars and possibly up to 400 billion stars. The figure depends on the number of very low-mass, or dwarf stars, which are hard to detect, especially more than 300 light years from our sun. Therefore, present estimates of the total number are uncertain. This can be compared to the one trillion (1012) stars of the neighbouring Andromeda Galaxy.
The stellar disc of the Milky Way does not have a sharp edge, a radius beyond which there are no stars. Rather, the number of stars drops smoothly with distance from the centre of the Galaxy. Beyond a radius of about 40,000 light years, the number of stars drops much faster, for reasons that are not understood.
Extending beyond the stellar disk is a much thicker disk of gas. Recent observations indicate that the gaseous disk of the Milky Way has a thickness of around 12000 light years–twice the previously accepted value. As a guide to the relative physical scale of the Milky Way, if the Solar System out to the orbit of Pluto were reduced to the size of a US quarter (about an inch or 25 mm in diameter), the Milky Way would have a diameter of 2,000 kilometers. At 220 kilometers per second it takes the Solar System about 240 million years to complete one orbit of the Galaxy (a galactic year).
The Galactic halo extends outward, but is limited in size by the orbits of two Milky Way satellites, the Large and the Small Magellanic Clouds, whose closest approach is at about 180,000 light years. At this distance or beyond, the orbits of most halo objects would be disrupted by the Magellanic Clouds, and the objects would likely be ejected from the vicinity of the Milky Way.
Galactic center.
The galactic disc, which bulges outward at the galactic center, has a diameter of 70–100,000 light years. 
The exact distance from the Sun to the galactic center is debated. The latest estimates give distances to the Galactic center of 25–28,000 light years.
Movement of material around the galactic center shows that it has a compact object of very large mass. The intense radio source named Sagittarius A*, thought to mark the center of the Milky Way, is now confirmed to be a supermassive black hole. Most galaxies are believed to have a supermassive black hole at their center.
The nature of the galaxy's bar is also actively debated, with estimates for its half-length and orientation spanning from 3,300–16,000 light years (short or a long bar) and 10–50 degrees. Viewed from the Andromeda Galaxy, it would be the brightest feature of our own galaxy.
Myth.
In Greek mythology, Zeus places his son (the baby Heracles) whose mother was a mortal woman on Hera's breast while she is sleeping so that the baby will drink her divine milk and become immortal. However, Hera wakes up while she is breastfeeding the baby and realizes she is nursing a baby she does not know. According to Greek mythology, she then pushes the baby away and a stream of her milk sprays the night sky, making a faint band of light known as the Milky Way.

</doc>
<doc id="508" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=508" title="Movement">
Movement

For other uses, see Movement (disambiguation).
Movement, or motion, is the state of changing something's position—that is, changing where something is. A flying bird or a walking person are moving, because they change where they are from one place to another. There are many kinds of science and math related to movement.
For example, thanks to Albert Einstein, we know that all "position" is relative. This means that everything's position depends on where they exist in relation to other things. For example, a ball is 5 feet away from a box, 3 feet away from a chair, and a foot away from a table. According to Einstein, the ball's position means how far the ball is from other things, so by telling you how far the ball was from other things, I told you its position. An object's "movement" is also relative. Its movement depends on where it is in relation to other things and where it's going to in relation to other things.
There are many things involved in movement, such as speed, velocity, acceleration, gravity, magnetic attraction and repulsion, friction, and inertia. Also, work is needed to produce movement. Light moves at about 300,000 kilometres per second or 186,000 miles per second.
Control of movement.
In all animals, movement is controlled by the nervous system, especially the brain and spinal cord. 
The muscles that control the eye are driven by the optic tectum in the midbrain. All the voluntary muscles in the body are driven by motor neurons in the spinal cord and hindbrain. Spinal motor neurons are controlled by neural circuits of the spinal cord, and by inputs from the brain. The spinal circuits do many reflex responses, and also do rhythmic movements such as walking or swimming. The descending connections from the brain give more sophisticated control.
The brain has several motor areas that project directly to the spinal cord. At the highest level is the primary motor cortex, a strip of tissue at the back edge of the frontal lobe. This tissue sends a massive projection directly to the spinal cord, through the pyramidal tract. This allows for precise voluntary control of the fine details of movements. There are other brain areas which affect movement. Among the most important secondary areas are the premotor cortex, basal ganglia, and cerebellum.
In addition to all of the above, the brain and spinal cord contain extensive circuitry to control the autonomic nervous system, which works by secreting hormones and by modulating the "smooth" muscles of the gut. The autonomic nervous system affects heart rate, digestion, respiration rate, salivation, perspiration, urination, and sexual arousal, and several other processes. Most of its functions are not under direct voluntary control.

</doc>
<doc id="510" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=510" title="Metaphor">
Metaphor

Metaphor is a term for a figure of speech. It does not use a word in its basic literal sense. Instead, it uses a word in a kind of comparison. We run, and we also say rivers run. We may run into trouble, especially if we run up a bill at the bar. 
So a metaphor uses words to make a picture in our mind. It takes a word from its original context, and uses it in another.
Metaphors are an essential part of language: it is not possible to speak or write without them. A simple example is the word "run". This has a basic meaning of "moving quickly" or "go with quick steps on alternate feet, never having both feet on the ground at the same time". The "Concise Oxford Dictionary" then gives 
34 other uses as a verb; 21 uses as a noun; about 50 uses in short phrases. All of these are metaphors, although we do not usually notice this. 
We use metaphors to make "indirect" comparisons, but without using 'like' or 'as' – because that would be a simile. A simile is a "direct" comparison: "Jane is like a child".
A metaphor very often uses the verb 'to be': "love "is" war", for example, not "love "is like" war" (that is a simile).
Poetry includes much metaphor, usually more than prose.
Spam is an example that any email user knows about – this word was originally a metaphor, from 'Spam', a type of canned meat. Servers putting unwanted email into somebody's inbox was similar to waiters putting unwanted Spam into food. This was originally suggested by a Monty Python scene. When we use a metaphor very often and we forget the old meaning, or forget that the two meanings are connected, this is a 'dead metaphor'.
Originally "metaphor" was a Greek word for 'transfer'. It came from "meta" ('beyond') and "pherein" ('carry'). So the word "metaphor" in English was a metaphor, too. Today in Greek, "metaphor" is a trolley (a thing that is pushed for carrying shopping or bags).
Simple metaphors.
Description.
A simple metaphor has a single link between the subject and the metaphoric vehicle. The vehicle thus has a single meaning which is transferred directly to the subject.
Examples.
In the simple metaphor, the effort to understand what the author or speaker intends is relatively low, and hence it may easily be used with a wider and less sophisticated audience.
Complex metaphors.
Description.
A complex metaphor happens where a simple metaphor is based on a secondary metaphoric element. For example using a metaphor of 'light' for 'understanding' may be complexified by saying 'throwing light' rather than 'shining light'. 'Throwing' is an extra metaphor for how light arrives. 
Compound metaphors.
Description.
A compound metaphor is one where there are multiple parts in the metaphor that are used to snag the listener. These parts may be enhancement words such as adverbs, adjectives, etc.
Each part in the compound metaphor may be used to signify an additional item of meaning.
Examples.
Compound metaphors are like a multiple punch, hitting the listener repeatedly with metaphoric elements. Where the complex metaphor uses stacked layers to enhance the metaphor, the compound metaphor uses sequential words. The compound metaphor is also known as a loose metaphor.
Live and dead metaphors.
A live metaphor is one which a reader notices. A dead metaphor is one no-one notices because it has become so common in the language. 
Examples.
Two people walk off a tennis court. Someone asks the loser: "What happened?".

</doc>
<doc id="511" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=511" title="Metabolism">
Metabolism

Metabolism is the name given to the chemical reactions which keep us alive. It happens in the cells of living organisms.
Reactions catalyzed by enzymes allow organisms to grow, reproduce, maintain their structures, and respond to their environments. The word ‘metabolism’ can also refer to digestion and the transport of substances into and between different cells.
Metabolism is usually divided into two categories. Catabolism breaks down organic matter and harvests energy by way of cellular respiration. Anabolism uses energy to construct molecules such as proteins and nucleic acids.
The chemical reactions of metabolism are organized into metabolic pathways, or cycles, like the Krebs cycle. One chemical is transformed through a series of steps into another chemical by a series of enzymes.
The metabolic system of an organism decides which substances it finds nutritious and which poisonous. For example, some prokaryotes use hydrogen sulfide as a nutrient, yet this gas is poisonous to animals. The speed of metabolism, the metabolic rate, influences how much food an organism will need, and how it is able to get that food.
A striking feature of metabolism is the similarity of the basic metabolic pathways and components between even vastly different species. For example, the set of carboxylic acids that are best known as the intermediates in the citric acid cycle are present in all known organisms, being found in species as diverse as the unicellular bacterium "Escherichia coli" and huge multicellular organisms like elephants. These striking similarities in metabolic pathways are likely due to their early appearance in the evolution of life, and kept because of their efficiency.

</doc>
<doc id="512" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=512" title="Microscope">
Microscope

A microscope is a scientific instrument. It makes things normally too small to be seen look larger. This way they can be seen better and examined correctly. People who use microscopes commonly in their jobs include doctors and scientists. Microscopes are commonly used in schools to help students in science classes such as biology or chemistry.
The earliest microscopes had only one lens and are called "simple microscopes". "Compound microscopes" have at least two lenses. In a compound microscope, the lens closer to the eye is called the "eyepiece". The lens at the other end is called the "objective".
Microscopes make things seem larger than they are, to about 1000 times larger. This is much stronger than any magnifying glass.
Types of microscopes.
There are many different types of microscopes. The most common are compound light microscopes and electron microscopes. In a compound light microscope, the object is illuminated: light is thrown on it. The image formed by the object is looked at. Light passes through two lenses and makes the image bigger. 
Electron microscopes come in different types. Transmission electron microscopes (TEMs) fire electrons into the object being looked at. This carries information about how the object looks into a magnetic "lens". The image is then magnified onto a television screen. Scanning electron microscopes also fire electrons at the object, but in a single beam. These lose their power when they strike the object, and the loss of power results in something else being generated—usually an X-ray. This is sensed and magnified onto a screen.

</doc>
<doc id="513" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=513" title="Mass">
Mass

For other uses, see Mass (disambiguation).
The mass of an object is a measure of an object's resistance to acceleration, sometimes also called "inertia". A mountain has typically more mass than a rock, for instance. Mass should not be confused with the related but quite different concept of weight. A large mass like the Earth will attract a small mass like a human being with enough force to keep the human being from floating away. "Mass attraction" is another word for gravity.
Units of mass.
The unit of mass in the International System of Units is the kilogram, which is represented by the symbol 'kg'. Fractions and multiples of this basic unit include the gram (one thousandth of a kg, symbol 'g') and the tonne (one thousand kg), amongst many others.
In some fields or applications, it is convenient to use different units to simplify the discussions or writings. For instance,
Traditional units are still in encountered in some countries: Imperial units such as the ounce or the pound were in widespread use within the British Empire. Some of them are still popular in the United States, which also uses units like the short ton ton (2,000 pounds) and the long ton (2,240 pounds), not to be confused with the metric tonne (1,000 kg).
Conservation of mass and relativity.
Mass is an intrinsic property of the object: it does not depend on its volume, or position in space, for instance. For a long time (at least since the works of Antoine Lavoisier in the second half of the eighteen century), it has been known that the sum of the masses of objects that interact or of the chemicals that react remain conserved throughout these processes. This remains an excellent approximation for everyday life and even most laboratory work.
However, Einstein has shown through his special theory of relativity that the mass "m" of an object moving at speed "v" with respect to an observer must be higher than the mass of the same object observed at rest "m0" with respect to the observer. The applicable formula is
formula_1
where "c" stands for the speed of light. This change in mass is only important when the speed of the object with respect to the observer becomes a large fraction of "c".

</doc>
<doc id="514" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=514" title="Mercury (planet)">
Mercury (planet)

Mercury is the smallest planet in the Solar System. It is the closest planet to the sun. It makes one trip around the Sun once every 87.969 days. Mercury is bright when it is visible from Earth, ranging from −2.0 to 5.5 in apparent magnitude. It cannot be easily seen as it is usually too close to the Sun. Because Mercury is normally lost in the glare of the Sun (except during a solar eclipse), Mercury can only be seen in the morning or evening twilight.
Compared to what is known about the other planets in the Solar System, little is known about Mercury. Telescopes on the Earth show only a small, bright crescent. The first of two spacecraft to visit the planet was Mariner 10, which mapped only about 45% of the planet’s surface from 1974 to 1975. The second is the MESSENGER spacecraft, which finished mapping the planet in March 2013. 
Mercury looks a lot like Earth's Moon. It has many craters with areas of smooth plains, no moons around it and no atmosphere as we know it. However, Mercury does have an extremely thin atmosphere, known as an exosphere. Unlike Earth's moon, Mercury has a large iron core, which gives off a magnetic field about 1% as strong as that of the Earth. It is a very dense planet due to the large size of its core. Surface temperatures can be anywhere from about 90 to 700 K (−183 °C to 427 °C, −297 °F to 801 °F), with the subsolar point being the hottest and the bottoms of craters near the poles being the coldest.
Known sightings of Mercury date back to at least the first millennium BC. Before the 4th century BC, Greek astronomers thought that Mercury was two different objects: one able to be seen only at sunrise, which they called Apollo; the other that was only able to be seen at sunset, which they called Hermes. The English name for the planet is from the Romans, who named it after the Roman god Mercury, which they thought to be the same as the Greek god Hermes. The symbol for Mercury is based on Hermes' staff.
Even though Mercury is the closest planet to the Sun, it is not the warmest. This is because it has no atmosphere, so any heat that the Sun gives to it quickly escapes into space.
Inside Mercury.
Mercury is one of four inner planets in the Solar System, and has a rocky body like the Earth. It is the smallest planet in the Solar System, with a radius of 2,439.7 km. Mercury is even smaller than some of the largest moons in the solar system, such as Ganymede and Titan. However, it has a greater mass than the largest moons in the solar system. Mercury is made of about 70% metallic and 30% silicate material. Mercury's density is the second highest in the Solar System at 5.427 g/cm³, only a little bit less than Earth’s.

</doc>
<doc id="515" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=515" title="Mars">
Mars

For other uses, see Mars (disambiguation).
Mars is the fourth planet from the Sun in the Solar System and the second-smallest solid planet. Mars is rocky and cold, with polar ice caps of frozen water and carbon dioxide. It has the largest volcano in the Solar System, and some very large impact craters. Mars is named after the mythological Roman god of war because it is a red planet, the colour of blood.
Appearance.
Mars has two small moons, called Phobos and Deimos. The planet Mars is made of rock. The ground there is red because of iron oxide (rust) in the rocks and dust. The planet's atmosphere is very thin and contains a lot of carbon dioxide and a very tiny amount of oxygen. The temperatures on Mars are colder than on Earth, because it is farther away from the Sun and has less air to keep warmth in. There is water ice and frozen carbon dioxide at the north and south poles. Mars does not have any liquid water on the surface now, but signs of run-off on the surface were probably caused by water.
The average thickness of the planet's crust is about 50 km (31 mi), with a maximum thickness of 125 km (78 mi).
Physical geography.
Rotation.
A Martian day is called a "sol", and is a little longer than an Earth day. Mars rotates in 24 hours, and 37 minutes. It rotates on a tilt, just like the Earth does, so it has four different seasons. Of all the planets in the Solar System, the seasons of Mars are the most Earth-like, due to the similar tilts of the two planets' rotational axes. The lengths of the Martian seasons are about twice those of Earth's, as Mars's greater distance from the Sun leads to the Martian year being about two Earth years long. Martian surface temperatures vary from lows of about −143 °C (at the winter polar caps) to highs of up to 35 °C (in equatorial summer). The wide range in temperatures is due mostly to the thin atmosphere which cannot store much solar heat. The planet is also 1.52 times as far from the Sun as Earth, resulting in just 43% of the amount of sunlight.
Water.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : Water on Mars
A recent report says Martian dark streaks on the surface were affected by water.
Liquid water cannot exist on the surface of Mars due to its low atmospheric pressure (there's not enough air to hold it in), except at the lowest elevations for short periods. The two polar ice caps appear to be made largely of frozen water. The amount of ice in the south polar ice cap, if melted, would be enough to cover the entire planet's surface 11 meters deep. A permafrost mantle stretches from the pole to latitudes of about 60°.
Geological evidence gathered by unmanned missions suggest that Mars once had much liquid water on its surface. In 2005, radar data revealed the presence of large quantities of water ice at the poles, and at mid-latitudes. The Mars rover "Spirit" sampled chemical compounds containing water molecules in March 2007. The "Phoenix" lander found water ice in shallow Martian soil in July 2008.
Landforms seen on Mars strongly suggest that liquid water at some time existed on the planet's surface. Huge areas of ground have been scraped and eroded. These are known as 'outflow channels', and cut across the surface in about 25 places.
Polar caps.
North polar early summer ice cap (1999)
South polar midsummer ice cap (2000)
Mars has two permanent polar ice caps. During a pole's winter, it lies in continuous darkness, chilling the surface and causing the deposition of 25–30% of the atmosphere into slabs of CO2 ice (dry ice). When the poles are again exposed to sunlight, the frozen CO2 sublimes (turns to vapor), creating enormous winds that sweep off the poles as fast as 400 km/h. Each season this moves large amounts of dust and water vapor, giving rise to Earth-like frost and large cirrus clouds and dust storms. Clouds of water-ice were photographed by the "Opportunity" rover in 2004.
The polar caps at both poles consist primarily of water ice.
Atmosphere.
Mars has a very thin atmosphere with barely any oxygen (it is mostly carbon dioxide). Because there is an atmosphere, however thin it is, the sky does change colour when the sun rises and sets. The dust in the Martian atmosphere make the Martian sunsets have a rather blue colour. Mars's atmosphere, of course, is too thin to protect Mars from meteors, which is why the lower half of Mars has so many craters. Some craters hit Mars with so much force a few pieces of Mars went flying into space – even to Earth! People have actually found rocks on Earth that have chemicals in them – chemicals that are exactly like the ones in Martian rocks. These rocks also look like they fell really quickly through the atmosphere, so it is reasonable to think they came from Mars.
Geography.
Mars is home to the highest known mountain in the Solar System, Olympus Mons. Olympus Mons is about 17 miles (or 27 kilometers) high. This is more than three times the height of Earth's tallest mountain, Mount Everest. It is also home to Valles Marineris, the third largest rift system (canyon) in the Solar System, 4,000 km long.
Observation of Mars.
Our records of watching and recording Mars start with ancient Egyptian astronomers in the 2nd millennium BC. 
Detailed observations of the location of Mars were made by Babylonian astronomers who developed methods using math to predict the future position of the planet. The ancient Greek philosophers and astronomers developed a model of the solar system with the Earth at the center ('geocentric'), instead of the sun. They used this model to explain the planet's motions. Indian and Islamic astronomers estimated the size of Mars and its distance from Earth. Similar work was done by Chinese astronomers.
In the 16th century, Nicholas Copernicus proposed a model for the Solar System in which the planets follow circular orbits about the Sun. This 'heliocentric' model was the beginning of modern astronomy. It was revised by Johannes Kepler, who gave an elliptical orbit for Mars which better fit the data from our observations.
The first observations of Mars by telescope was by Galileo Galilei in 1610. Within a century, astronomers discovered distinct albedo features (changes in brightness) on the planet, including the dark patch and polar ice caps. They were able to find the planet's day (rotation period) and axial tilt.
Better telescopes developed early in the 19th century allowed permanent Martian albedo features to be mapped in detail. The first crude map of Mars was published in 1840, followed by better maps from 1877 onward. Astronomers mistakenly thought they had detected the spectroscopic mark of water in the Martian atmosphere, and the idea of life on Mars became popular among the public. Percival Lowell believed he could see an artificial network of canals on Mars. These linear features later proved to be an optical illusion, and the atmosphere was found to be too thin to support an Earth-like environment, including surface water.
Yellow clouds on Mars have been observed since the 1870s, which were windblown sand or dust. During the 1920s, the range of Martian surface temperature was measured; it ranged from –85 to 7 oC. The planetary atmosphere was found to be arid with only traces of oxygen and water. In 1947, Gerard Kuiper showed that the thin Martian atmosphere contained extensive carbon dioxide; roughly double the quantity found in Earth's atmosphere. The first standard naming of Mars surface features was set in 1960 by the International Astronomical Union. 
Since the 1960s, multiple robotic spacecraft and rovers have been sent to explore Mars from orbit and the surface. The planet has remained under observation by ground and space-based instruments across a broad range of the electromagnetic spectrum (visible light, infrared and others). The discovery of meteorites on Earth that came from Mars has allowed laboratory examination of the chemical conditions on the planet.
Martian 'canals'.
Map of Mars by Giovanni Schiaparelli, compiled between 1877 and 1886, showing "canali" features as fine lines
Mars sketched as observed by Lowell sometime before 1914. (South top)
During the 1877 opposition, Italian astronomer Giovanni Schiaparelli used a 22 cm telescope to help produce the first detailed map of Mars. What caught people's attention was that the maps had features he called "canali". These were later shown to be an optical illusion (not real). These "canali" were supposedly long straight lines on the surface of Mars to which he gave names of famous rivers on Earth. His term "canali" was popularly mistranslated in English as "canals", and thought to be made by intelligent beings. 
Other astronomers thought they could see the canals too, especially the American astronomer Percy Lowell, who built his telescopes and his career on the idea.
Although these results were widely accepted, they were contested. Greek astronomer Eugène M. Antoniadi and English naturalist Alfred Russel Wallace were against the idea; Wallace was extremely outspoken. As bigger and better telescopes were used, fewer long, straight "canali" were observed. During an observation in 1909 by Flammarion with a 84 cm telescope, irregular patterns were observed, but no "canali" were seen.
Life on Mars?
Because Mars is the one of the closest planets to Earth in the Solar System, many have wondered if there is any kind of life on Mars. Today we know that the kind of life, if any, would be some simple bacteria-type organism. 
Meteorites.
NASA maintains a catalog of 34 Mars meteorites, that is, meteorites which originally came from Mars. These assets are highly valuable since they are the only physical samples available of Mars. 
Studies at NASA's Johnson Space Center show that at least three of the meteorites contain possible evidence of past life on Mars, in the form of microscopic structures resembling fossilized bacteria (so-called biomorphs). Although the scientific evidence collected is reliable, and the rocks are correctly described, what made the rocks look like they do is not clear. To date, scientists are still trying to agree if it really is evidence of simple life on Mars.
Over the past few decades, scientists have agreed that when using meteorites from other planets found on Earth (or rocks brought back to Earth), various things are needed to be sure of life. Those things include:
For people to agree on past life in a geologic sample, most or all of these things must be met. This has not happened yet, but investigations are still in progress. Reexaminations of the biomorphs found in the three Martian meteorites are underway.
The significance of water.
Liquid water is necessary for life and metabolism, so if water was present on Mars, the chances of life evolving is improved. The Viking orbiters found evidence of possible river valleys in many areas, erosion and, in the southern hemisphere, branched streams. Since then, rovers and orbiters have also looked closely and eventually proved water was on the surface at one time, and is still found as ice in the polar ice caps and underground.
Today.
So far, scientists have not found life on Mars, either living or extinct. Several space probes have gone to Mars to study it. Some have orbited (gone around) the planet, and some have landed on it. There are pictures of the surface of Mars that were sent back to Earth by the probes. Some people are interested in sending astronauts to visit Mars. They could do a better search, but getting astronauts there would be difficult and expensive. The astronauts would be in space for many years, and it could be very dangerous because of radiation from the sun. So far we have only sent unmanned probes. 
The most recent probe to the planet is the Mars Science Laboratory. It landed on Aeolis Palus in Gale Crater on Mars on 6 August 2012. It brought with it a mobile explorer called 'Curiosity'. It is the most advanced space probe ever. Curiosity has dug up Martian soil and studied it in its laboratory. It has found sulfur, chlorine, and water molecules.
Popular culture.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : Mars in fiction
Some famous stories were written about this idea. The writers used the name "Martians" for intelligent beings from Mars. In 1898, H. G. Wells wrote "The War of the Worlds", a famous novel about Martians attacking the Earth. In 1938, Orson Welles broadcast a radio version of this story in the United States, and many people thought it was really happening and were very afraid. Beginning in 1912, Edgar Rice Burroughs wrote several novels about adventures on Mars.
Other websites.
 Find more information on Mars by searching one of Wikipedia's :
 Dictionary definitions from Wiktionary<br>
 from Wikibooks<br>
 from Wikiquote<br>
 from Wikisource<br>
 from Commons<br>
 from Wikinews<br>
 from Wikiversity<br>
 from Wikispecies<br>
 from Wikidata<br>
 from MediaWiki

</doc>
<doc id="516" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=516" title="Mac OS">
Mac OS

The Macintosh Operating System (Mac OS) is a program that allows a Macintosh computer to operate and be used. Mac OS was first made by Apple Inc. in 1984. In those days Mac OS was called Macintosh System Software – which was shortened to System or SSW (System Software). The term "Mac OS" first appeared in the splash screen for System 7.5.1, but was not adopted as the new name until the release of Mac OS 7.6.
The latest version of Mac OS is Mac OS X 10.9.2. And a mobile version of iOS. The x in the OS x name is a roman numeral for 10.
References.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="517" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=517" title="Apple Macintosh">
Apple Macintosh

The Apple Macintosh or just “Mac” is a line of personal computers made by the American company Apple Inc. The Macintosh was one of the first computers in which the people could use a mouse for pointing on a screen which had icons. This new way of working with a computer (interface) was known as graphical user interface. It was this feature of the Macintosh that made it so popular.
History.
Processor history.
"See Apple Intel transition."
Macintoshes were different than other personal computers for many years based on their central processor unit (CPU). At the start, Macs used Motorola 68000 chips instead of Intel chips. Later, Macs used PowerPC chips. In 2006, Macs started to use Intel chips. Today, Macs are sold with Intel quad-core i7 chips.
Macintoshes.
Software.
The Mac does not have the Windows operating system installed on it. It has its own range of operating systems, known as OS X. The newest operating system is known as “Yosemite". Macs can run both Windows and OS X at the same time with help of a program called “Boot Camp”, which comes on every Mac.
General opinion.
In general, Macintosh computers cost more than other computers of the same size. But people say they have very good quality, which explains why they’re really expensive.
Related pages.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="518" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=518" title="Metre">
Metre

A metre (US spelling, "meter") is the basic unit of length in the SI measurement system. The abbreviation for the metre is m. The first meaning (in the French Revolution), it was 1/10,000,000th (one ten-millionth) of the distance between the Earth's equator and the North Pole along the Paris meridian. The metre is now officially defined as the distance light travels in a vacuum in 1/299,792,458 of a second.
In the imperial system of measurement, one metre is equal to about 39.37 inches, 3.28 feet, or about 1.09 yards.
Units based on the metre.
"*Note: units in bold are the most commonly used."

</doc>
<doc id="519" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=519" title="Magnifying glass">
Magnifying glass

A magnifying glass is a lens through which can be used to make things appear bigger, so you can see them better. It is used in many applications and manual operations, e.g., for examining postage stamps in philately.
The magnifying glass consists of a piece of convex-shaped glass or plastic. It has to be held at the right distance between the eye and the object for the object to be in focus. The magnifying glass usually comes with a handle. A telescope is a more advanced kind of magnifying glass and consists of at least two glass lenses. 
A pair of binoculars is like a telescope for each eye. "Spectacles" or eyeglasses also use lenses to correct a person's vision.
Other websites.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="520" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=520" title="Molecule">
Molecule

A molecule is the smallest amount of a chemical substance that can exist. If a molecule were split into smaller pieces, it would be a different substance. 
Molecules are made up of atoms that are stuck together in a particular shape or form. Not all combinations of atoms are usually possible; atoms like certain shapes, but not others. Also, they like certain arrangements of atoms. For example, oxygen atoms always have two bonds with other atoms, carbon atoms always have four bonds with other atoms, and nitrogen atoms always have three bonds with other atoms.
In gases like air, the molecules are just flying around. In liquids like water, the molecules are stuck together but they can still move. In solids like sugar, the molecules can only vibrate. There is also another state of matter known as plasma where the molecules fly around crazier and faster than those in a gas. 
With a molecular formula, you can write down the numbers of all atoms in a molecule. For example, the molecular formula of Glucose is C6H12O6. That means that one molecule of Glucose is made up of six carbon atoms, twelve hydrogen atoms and six oxygen atoms.
Bonding.
For a molecule to exist, atoms have to stick together. This happens when two atoms share electrons. Instead of circling just one atom, the electron now circles around two. This is called bonding. The shared electrons are called 'bonds'. Sometimes, more than one electron is shared. The more electrons are shared, the stronger the bond gets and the stronger the atoms stick together.
Bonds can also be broken apart. Since most bonds require energy to form, they also give off energy when they are broken. But before most bonds break, the molecule has to be heated. Then the atoms start to move, and when they move too much, the bond breaks. Molecules that require less energy to break than they give off when broken are called fuels. For example, a candle will just sit there and nothing happens. But when you use a match to light it, it will burn for a long time. The match brings the energy to break the first bonds, which release enough energy to break the bonds below them, until the candle has burned down.

</doc>
<doc id="522" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=522" title="Moral reasoning">
Moral reasoning

Moral reasoning is a topic studied in psychology and in moral philosophy. It studies how people think about moral issues, problems, and questions. Psychologists who have studied it include Lawrence Kohlberg and Elliot Turiel. Kohlberg said that moral understanding develops in three main stages as a person gets older, but Turiel said that there are three domains of moral understanding that develop at the same time as a person gets older.
Moral philosophy, or ethics, is a major branch of philosophy. It is the study of value or quality. It covers the analysis and use of concepts such as right, wrong, good, evil, and responsibility.

</doc>
<doc id="524" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=524" title="Mosque">
Mosque

<indicator name="top-icon"></indicator>
A mosque is a place where Muslims worship. The word "mosque" comes from the Arabic word "masjid". . A larger, 'collective', mosque is called a "masjid jāmi". Larger mosques offer more services to their community. 
For many Muslim people, a mosque is more than a place of worship. Muslims worship, study and discuss Islam, and do many other things in a mosque and its compounds. In the United Kingdom, many mosques are used as community centres. They are also used to teach about Islam. Religious festivals and gatherings are held in mosques. Weddings are one example. Mosques have rules to control what people do inside. One of these rules is that it is considered rude to disturb another person who is worshipping. 
Many mosques are known for their Islamic architecture. The earliest mosques, opened in 7th century were open-air spaces. They are the "Quba Mosque" and "Masjid al-Nabawi". Later Mosques were buildings that were specially designed. Nowadays, mosques are in every continent, except Antarctica.
The mosque played a major part in the spread of education in the Muslim World, and the association of the mosque with education remained one of its main characteristics throughout history, and, the school became an indispensable appendage to the mosque. From the earliest days of Islam, the mosque was the centre of the Muslim community, a place for prayer, meditation, religious instruction, political discussion, and a school. And anywhere Islam took hold, mosques were established, and basic religious and educational instruction began. Once established, mosques developed into well-known places of learning, often with hundreds, even thousands, of students, and frequently contained important libraries
In Iraq, pharmacology, engineering, astronomy and other subjects were taught in the mosques of Baghdad, and students came from Syria, Persia and India to learn these sciences. While at the Qarawiyin Mosque, there were courses on grammar, rhetoric, logic, mathematics, and astronomy , and possibly history, geography and chemistry
Architecture.
Many mosques are famous works of architecture. They are often built in a style that has stayed the same for many centuries. Many mosques have prayer halls, domes, and minarets. They may also have a courtyard. 
Mosques were first built on the Arabian Peninsula. The Muslims who built them used old architectural styles. They also combined these styles in new ways. A major influence was the palaces built during the Parthian and Sassanid dynasties of Persia. The "Sarvestan palace" from the Sassanid era is a good example of this. It has an arched entrance and a central dome. These features already existed in Persia before Islam.
After the Arab invasion of Persia, the new style, with its Sassanid influence, was used for the new Islamic world. Many forms of mosques have developed in different regions of the Islamic world. Important mosque types include the early Abbasid mosques, T-type mosques, and the central-dome mosques of Anatolia. In the 20th century, many countries that grew rich from oil paid for the building of many new mosques. The rulers of these countries often hired leading architects to design these mosques. They included non-Muslims.
Arab plan.
Many early mosques have a square or rectangular plan. They also have a prayer hall and an enclosed courtyard. This is known as "Arab-plan". The first mosques of this type were built during the Umayyad Dynasty. 
The flat roof of the prayer hall was supported by columns. Many rows of columns were needed to support such roofs; this is called "hypostyle architecture". One of the most famous hypostyle mosques is the Mezquita de Córdoba in Spain. It is supported by over 850 columns. 
In the warm Mediterranean and Middle Eastern climates, the courtyard served to hold the large number of worshippers during Friday prayers. Often, hypostyle mosques have outer arcades. They allow the visitors to enjoy the shade. Arab-plan mosques were built mostly during the Umayyad and Abbasid dynasties. The Arab plan was very simple, which did not allow for much further development. This caused that style of mosque to fall out of favour.
Central dome.
The Ottomans began building "central dome mosques" in the fifteenth century. These mosques have a large dome centered over the prayer hall. There may also be smaller domes, which are off-center over the prayer hall or the rest of the mosque. This style was heavily influenced by the Byzantine religious architecture with its use of central domes.
Iwan.
"Iwan mosques" are famous for their domed rooms and "iwans". Iwans are spaces with an arched roof. They have an opening at one end. One or more iwans face a central courtyard that serves as the prayer hall. The style borrows from pre-Islamic Iranian architecture. Most mosques with this style are in Iran.
Parts of Mosques.
Minarets.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : Minaret
Most mosques have minarets. Minarets are tall towers. Usually they are at one of the corners of the mosque. The top of the minaret is the highest point in the mosque, and usually the highest point in the area around the mosque. The tallest minaret in the world is in the Hassan II Mosque in Casablanca, Morocco.
The first mosques had no minarets. The most conservative Islamic groups, like "Wahhabis", still avoid building minarets. They see them as simply a fancy decoration and unnecessary. The first minaret was built in 665 in Basra during the reign of the Umayyad caliph Muawiyah I. Muawiyah encouraged the building of minarets, as they were supposed to be the same as bell towers on Christian churches. Because of this, mosque architects used the shape of the bell tower for their minarets. Both the minaret and the bell tower serve the same purpose — to call the faithful to prayer.
Before the five required daily prayers, a "muezzin" calls the worshippers to prayer from the minaret. In many countries like Singapore where Muslims are not the majority, mosques are stopped from loudly playing the call to prayer. The main problem is the use of electronic amplification of the call, which is now widely used by mosques.
Domes.
The domes were often placed directly above the main prayer hall. They represent the universe that Allah created. At first, these domes were small. They only took up a small part of the roof near the "mihrab". Later, they took the whole roof above the prayer hall. 
Domes normally have the shape of a hemisphere. The Mughals in India popularized onion-shaped domes in South Asia and Persia. Some mosques have several domes, as well as the main large dome. The other domes are often smaller.
Domes would help the "imam" be heard, as the sound waves would bounce in and then out of the dome making the voice louder.
Prayer hall.
All mosques have a prayer hall, which is also called "musalla". Normally, there is no furniture in it except for prayer mats or rugs. These are necessary, as Islamic prayer is usually done kneeling. 
Some mosques have Arabic calligraphy and "Qur'anic" verses on the walls to help worshipers focus on the beauty of Islam and its holiest book, the "Qur'an", as well as for decoration.
The "qiblah wall" is usually at the other side of the entrance to the prayer hall. This wall is specially decorated. In a properly sited mosque, it will be set perpendicular to a line leading to Mecca. People pray in rows parallel to the "qiblah" wall. They arrange themselves so they face Mecca. In the "qiblah" wall, usually at its center, is the "mihrab", a niche or depression showing the direction of Mecca. The "mihrab" serves as the place where the imam leads the five daily prayers.
Washing.
All people must wash themselves before they pray. Mosques often have fountains or other facilities for washing in their entrances or courtyards, so that people can perform the washing ritual before prayer.
At very small mosques, worshippers may use restrooms for their ritual washing, or wu'du. In traditional mosques, there is often a building specially for washing. This is often in the center of the courtyard. In the prayer halls, people must not wear shoes for much the same reason.
Modern features.
Modern mosques should appeal to the community they serve. For this reason, other facilities may also be available at the mosque, like health clinics, libraries, and sports halls.
The inside of mosques.
There may be decorative tiles, plaster or coloured mosaics on the walls. There are no pictures or statues.
Religious functions.
Prayers.
Adult Muslims are expected to pray five times a day. Most mosques have formal prayers for each of these times. If performing the prayer is difficult, for example for ill people, then exceptions are made. 
Mosques also hold a special prayer service, called "jumuah". This is done once a week. It is a form of Sabbath and replaces the Friday prayers at the mosque. Daily prayers can be done anywhere. However, Muslims are expected to do their Friday prayer at the mosque.
When a Muslim dies, a funeral prayer is normally held. It is held outdoors in a courtyard or square close to the mosque. The prayers have all the worshippers present, including the imam, taking part. During eclipses, mosques will host special prayers called eclipse prayers.
There are two large holidays ("Eids") in the Islamic calendar. During these days, there are special prayers at mosques in the morning. Larger mosques will normally hold them for their own communities as well as the people from smaller local mosques. Mosques, especially those in countries where Muslims are the majority, will also host "Eid" prayers outside in courtyards or town squares.
Ramadan events.
There are many events in "Ramadan", Islam's holiest month. During "Ramadan", Muslims must fast during the day. Mosques organise "iftar" dinners after sunset. These are done after the fourth required prayer of the day. Part of the food is given by members of the community, which creates nightly potluck dinners. The community contribution to these dinners is required. For this reason, mosques with smaller communities may not be able to hold the "iftar" dinners daily. 
Some mosques will also hold meals in the morning before dawn. Mosques will often invite poorer members of the community to these meals. Islam sees giving charity during Ramadan as good acts.
Larger mosques sometimes offer special, optional prayers. They are done after the last required prayer of the day. During each night of prayers, one member of the community who has memorized the entire Qur’an will recite a part of the book. It can last for up to two hours. Sometimes, several such people (not necessarily of the local community) take turns to do this. During the last ten days of Ramadan, larger mosques will host all-night programs to observe "Laylat al-Qadr". It is the night Muslims believe that the Islamic prophet Muhammad first received Qur'anic revelations. On that night, between sunset and sunrise, mosques employ speakers to teach the worshipers about Islam. Mosques or the community usually provide meals at times through the night.
Political functions.
During the late twentieth century, more and more mosques have been used for political purposes. Modern-day mosques in the Western world want to educate good citizens. The details differ greatly from mosque to mosque and from country to country.
Advocacy.
Countries with small Muslim populations use mosques as a way to support civic participation. They are more likely to do this than Muslim-majority countries of the Greater Middle East. American mosques host voter registration and civic participation drives. In the United States, Muslims are often immigrants, or the children of immigrants. Mosques want to interest these people for politics. They also want to keep them informed about issues that concern the Muslim community. People who attend the services at the mosque regularly are more likely to take part in protests, to sign petitions, and to involve themselves in political matters.
A link between political views and mosque attendance can still be seen in other parts of the world. After the al-Askari Mosque bombing in February 2006, imams and other Islamic leaders used mosques and Friday prayers to call for calm and peace during the widespread violence.
Beginning in the late twentieth century and continuing into the early twenty-first century, a small number of mosques have also become a base for extremist imams to support terrorism and extreme Islamic ideals. Finsbury Park Mosque in London is a mosque that has been used in this manner.
Social conflict.
Like other places of worship, mosques can be at the center of social conflicts. 
Babri Mosque was the centre of such a conflict up until the early 1990s when it was demolished. Before a solution could be found, the mosque was destroyed by about 200,000 Hindus. It took place on 6 December 1992. The mosque was built by Babur to mark the birthplace of Ram. It was believed to be on a site of an earlier Hindu temple. The conflict over the mosque was directly linked to rioting in Bombay (present-day Mumbai) as well as bombings in 1993 that killed 257 people.
In February 2006, a bombing seriously damaged Iraq's al-Askari Mosque. This increased the existing tensions. The conflict between two Muslim groups in Iraq had already led to other bombings. However mosque bombings are not limited to Iraq. In June 2005, a suicide bomber killed at least 19 people at an Afghan mosque. In April 2006, there were two explosions at India's Jama Masjid.
After the September 11 attacks, several American mosques were targets of attacks. These ranged from simple vandalism to arson.
The Jewish Defense League was suspected of plotting to bomb the King Fahd Mosque in Culver City, California. There were similar attacks in the United Kingdom after the 7 July 2005 London bombings. Outside the Western world, in June 2001, the Hassan Bek Mosque was the target of attacks. The attacks involved hundreds of Israelis angry at Arabs for a previous attack.
Saudi influence.
Saudi involvement in building mosques around the world only goes back to the 1960s.
In the 1980s, the Saudi Arabian government began to pay for the building of mosques in countries around the world. An estimated US$45 billion has been spent by the Saudi Arabian government for mosques and Islamic schools in foreign countries. "Ain al-Yaqeen", a Saudi newspaper, reported in 2002 that Saudi money may have helped to build as many as 1,500 mosques and 2,000 other Islamic centers. Saudi citizens have also given a lot of money to mosques in the Islamic world, especially in countries where they see Muslims as poor and oppressed. Following the fall of the Soviet Union, in 1992, mosques in Afghanistan received money from Saudi citizens. The King Fahd Mosque in Culver City, California and the Islamic Cultural Center of Italy in Rome are two of Saudi Arabia's largest investments in foreign mosques as former Saudi king Fahd bin Abdul Aziz al-Saud gave US$8 million and US$50 million to the two mosques, respectively.
Rules and behaviour in mosques.
In a mosque, people should keep focused on worshiping "Allah". For this reason, there are a number of rules about the correct behaviour in a mosque. Some of these rules are the same all over the world, such as no shoes should be worn in the prayer hall. Other rules are different from mosque to mosque.
Prayer leader.
It is generally seen as good to have someone who leads the prayers, though this is not strictly necessary. The person who usually leads the prayers is called "imam". He must be a free and honest man. He should also be an authority when it comes to answering questions on religion. In mosques that were built or that are kept up by the government, the imam is selected by the ruler. In private mosques, the community selects the imam, through majority voting. 
Only men may lead prayers for men. Women are allowed to lead prayers for congregations where there are only women.
Attending a mosque.
In addition to washing, there are other rules that also apply to those who enter the mosque, even if they do not wish to pray there. It is forbidden to wear shoes in the carpeted area of the prayer hall. Some mosques also do not allow wearing shoes in other parts, even though these may not be devoted to praying. 
Islam requires that its believers wear clothes that show modesty. As a result, both men and women must follow this rule when they attend a mosque (though mosques may not always enforce the rules). Men are supposed to come to the mosque wearing loose and clean clothes that do not show the shape of the body. Similarly, women who come to the mosque are expected to wear loose clothing, shirts, pants that cover to the wrists and ankles and cover their heads such as with a "hijab". Many Muslims, regardless of their ethnic background, wear Middle eastern clothing associated with Arabic Islam to special occasions and prayers at mosques.
Mosques are places of worship. For this reason, those inside the mosque should be respectful to those who are praying. Loud talking or discussion of topics that could be disrespectful, is forbidden in areas where people are praying. It is also considered as rude to walk in front of Muslims in prayer or otherwise disturb them. 
Men and women pray in different parts.
Islamic law requires men and women to be separated in the prayer hall. Ideally, women should pray behind men. Muhammad said, women should pray at home, not at the mosque. Muhammad thought women should not be forbidden in mosques. The second caliph Umar at one time stopped women from attending mosques, especially at night, because he feared they may be teased by males, so he made them to pray at home. Sometimes a special part of the mosque was railed off for women; for example, the governor of Mecca in 870 had ropes tied between the columns to make a separate place for women.
Many mosques today will put the women behind a barrier or partition or in another room. Mosques in South and Southeast Asia put men and women in separate rooms, as the divisions were built into them centuries ago. In nearly two-thirds of American mosques, women pray behind partitions or in separate areas, not in the main prayer hall; some mosques do not admit women at all. Although there are sections only for women and children, the Grand Mosque in Mecca is desegregated.
Non-Muslims in mosques.
A few scholars of Islamic law believe that non-Muslims may be allowed into mosques, as long as they do not sleep or eat there. Followers of the "Maliki" school of Islamic jurisprudence disagree. They say that non-Muslims may not be allowed into mosques at all.
Different countries have different opinions on the question. Nearly all the mosques in the Arabian Peninsula as well as Morocco do not allow non-Muslims. The Hassan II Mosque in Casablanca is one of only two mosques in Morocco currently open to non-Muslims. 
In modern-day Saudi Arabia, the Grand Mosque and all of Mecca are open only to Muslims. Likewise, the Masjid al-Nabawi and the city of Medina that surrounds it are also off-limits to those who do not practice Islam. For mosques in other areas, it has most commonly been taken that non-Muslims may only enter mosques if granted permission to do so by Muslims and if they have a proper reason.
In modern Turkey non-Muslim tourists are allowed to enter any mosque, but must obey the rules of decorum. Visiting a mosque is allowed only between prayers; visitors must wear long trousers and take off their shoes; women must cover their heads; no photos; no loud talk is allowed. No references to other religions are allowed (no crosses on necklaces, no cross gestures etc.).
However, there are also many other places in the west as well as the Islamic world where non-Muslims are welcome to enter mosques. Most mosques in the United States, for example, report receiving non-Muslim visitors every month. Many Mosques throughout the United States welcome non-Muslims as a sign of openness to the rest of the community and to encourage conversions to Islam.
Dogs.
Dogs are usually banned from entering mosques, but on 24 September 2008, the Muslim Law Council UK made special ruling, called a "fatwa", which granted a blind Muslim permission to take his guide dog into the mosque.
Mosques as hostels.
It is common for a smaller mosque to serve as a hostel for Muslims on "haj" (pilgrimage to Mecca). Sometimes mosques are used for refugees, or as temporary homes for homeless people. Obligations to neighbours in Islam are very strict, and specific. In the Qur'an Mohammed said that a person who helps others in the hour of need, and who helps the oppressed; that person God will help on the Day of Travail (agony). There are other commands, such as helping the poor and being nice to people. An important part of being Muslim, or just being part of the mosque, is taking care of people who need help. A mosque is a social, as well as a religious, group.
A madrassa is a little different from a mosque. A madrassa focuses on teaching Islam, usually to children and young people.
Mosques in Spain.
When Spain was under Muslim control, some of the most beautiful buildings were mosques. After 1492, Spain was under Christian control. However, the Christians did not tear down the mosques. They simply put a crucifix in them to make them into churches. These mosques influenced the Renaissance architecture (way of building) in Europe.

</doc>
<doc id="525" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=525" title="Mammal">
Mammal

Mammals are the group of vertebrate animals which form the class Mammalia. They have fur and a very precise kind of temperature regulation. The females bear live young, and produce milk for the young. Parental care of the young is universal among mammals, and it is essential because live birth limits the number of offspring.
Main characteristics.
Reproductive cycle.
Most marsupial and eutherian mammals have a reproductive cycle known as the oestrous cycle (U.S: estrous cycle). Females are sexually active only during the oestrous stage, when they are 'on heat' for a few days each month. If an ovum is not fertilised, the endometrium (uterus lining) is resorbed. Oestrus cycles may occur once or twice a year, or many times a year. Each group of mammals has its own frequency.
Humans and primates, are quite different. They have a menstrual cycle. In this case, females are sexually receptive at any time, but only fertile when an ovum is released from an ovary. In this case, the endometrium (if not needed for an fertilised egg) is discarded. The endometrium is shed, and takes with it a certain amount of blood. In this system, eggs are released from the ovaries mostly in the middle of the cycle, away from the mentrual period. This ovulation is 'concealed', meaning, it is not obvious when it occurs. This process, so it is thought, tends to keep the male and female together, which is unusual in mammals with the oestrous cycle.
Skeleton.
One diagnostic feature is the lower jaw which, unlike earlier forms, is composed of a single bone, the dentary. This is one feature which can be seen in fossils, or at least those which are complete enough to have the lower jaw. Mammals have three little bones in their inner ear, the ear ossicles. The ear ossicles are bones which were, long ago, part of the lower jaw in early proto-mammals.
There are quite a number of other features, particularly in the skull and limbs, so that it is usually possible identify and describe a mammal from its skeleton alone.
Neocortex and behaviour.
Another diagnostic feature is the neocortex of the brain, which no other vertebrate has. This is involved in the kind of flexible behaviour and learning typical of mammals. Reptiles and birds have much of their behaviour controlled by "inherited behaviour chains", which roughly translates as "instincts". Almost all animals can do some learning, but mammals do far more than other vertebrates. Their behaviour is much more flexible than lizards, for example, and that is made possible by their neocortex.
Other things in the life of mammals seem to be connected with this flexibility and learning. Play is a kind of early learning period in which, according to one theory, mammals develop skills which they will need in life. All mammalian young play, and this is very obvious in the more intelligent mammals (primates, cats).
The emotions of mammals are very noticeable, and rather similar to ours. It is possible, and quite common, for humans to have a friendly relationship with another mammal. It is quite impossible for a human to have any kind of relationship with a snake or a gecko (for example). This is because the reptile simply does not have the same basic emotions as a human.
Other items.
There are about 50 characters which are typical of mammals, and some of the most important are discussed above. A few more examples will make it clear that mammals are very different from reptiles and birds:
In the language of cladistics, these 50 unique characters are apomorphies which prove that mammals are a clade descended from a common ancestor.
Main groups.
Almost all mammals give birth to live young. There are only two mammals that lay eggs, called Monotremes, the Duck-billed Platypus "Ornithorhynchus", and the Spiny Anteater "Echidna", with four species. All are confined to Australia and New Guinea, and are the sole survivors of an earlier group of mammals. However, like other mammals, they feed milk to their young, and protect and look after them.
Other mammals are divided into the Marsupials and the Eutheria, the placental mammals. Marsupials are mammals with pouches to carry young in, like the kangaroo. All other mammals are Eutherian.
Modes of life.
In terms of number of species mammals, with 5488 species, are not the most successful vertebrates. Birds, with about 10,000 species have nearly twice as many, and 
reptiles have just as many as birds. Fish have even more species. There are 27,000 species of fish, of which nearly 26,000 are bony fish.
Despite this, many zoologists do regard mammals as a successful group of animals. One reason is that they are successful in all habitats on Earth. In the air, in the water, in forests, in the colder regions of the world, and above all on grasslands, where they are outstandingly successful.
In the air, the bats (Chiroptera) are the mammalian order with the most species. They 'own' the nighttime, since birds are largely diurnal (daytime) animals. Bats are hugely successful, mostly as nighttime predators of insects.
Seagoing mammals, the Cetacea and the pinnipeds, are very successful and significant predators. This includes the whales, seals, walrus, dolphins and others.
The terrestrial mammals are fewer in number of species than lizards, but they are huge in individual numbers, and far more important in the life of the terrestrial biomes. Their ability to move from place to place and adapt has made them a most effective group. Many mammals live in cold places. These mammals have thick hair or blubber to keep them warm. Others may live in rainforests. On land the rodents (rats, mice) are hugely successful, more common in numbers than any other mammals. Large mammals on land have been hunted to extinction in some parts of the world, but the ones which remain are now better protected.
Last, but certainly not least, are the primates. Their natural habitat, with few exceptions, are the forests. Most live in the trees, with hands that grasp, good colour vision, and intelligence. In the Pliocene period some moved out onto the savannahs as grassland replaced forests. Mankind is the result of this shift into the savannahs.
Taxonomy.
The evolutionary relationships among land vertebrates is as follows:
This sort of classification is not traditional, but it does reflect our knowledge of palaeontology and evolution.
Standardized textbook classification.
A somewhat standardized classification system has been adopted by most current mammalogy classroom textbooks. It is based on living animals. The following taxonomy of extant and recently extinct mammals is from Vaughan et al. 2000.
Class Mammalia
List of orders.
Mammals can be divided in a number of orders:

</doc>
<doc id="528" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=528" title="Number">
Number

A number is a concept from mathematics, used to count or measure. Depending on the field of mathematics, where numbers are used, there are different definitions:
Numbers are also used for other things besides counting. Numbers are used when things are measured. Numbers are used to study how the world works. Mathematics is a way to use numbers to learn about the world and make things. The study of the rules of the natural world is called science. The work that uses numbers to make things is called engineering.
Numbering methods.
Numbers for people.
There are different ways of giving symbols to numbers. These methods are called number systems. The most common number system that people use is the "base ten" number system. The "base ten" number system is also called the "decimal" number system. The base ten number system is common because people have ten fingers and ten toes. There are 10 different symbols {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9} used in the base ten number system. These ten symbols are called digits.
A symbol for a number is made up of these ten digits. The position of the digits shows how big the number is. For example, the number 23 in the decimal number system really means (2 times 10) plus 3, and 101 means 1 times a hundred (=100) plus 0 times 10 (=0) plus 1 times 1 (=1).
Numbers for machines.
Another number system is more common for machines. The machine number system is called the "binary" number system. The binary number system is also called the base two number system. There are two different symbols (0 and 1) used in the base two number system. These two symbols are called bits.
A symbol for a binary number is made up of these two bit symbols. The position of the bit symbols shows how big the number is. For example, the number 10 in the binary number system really means 1 times 2 plus 0, and 101 means 1 times four (=4) plus 0 times two (=0) plus 1 times 1 (=1). The binary number 10 is the same as the decimal number 2. The binary number 101 is the same as the decimal number 5.
Names of numbers.
English has special names for some of the numbers in the decimal number system that are "powers of ten". All of these power of ten numbers in the decimal number system use just the symbol "1" and the symbol "0". For example, ten tens is the same as ten times ten, or one hundred. In symbols, this is "10 × 10 = 100". Also, ten hundreds is the same as ten times one hundred, or one thousand. In symbols, this is "10 × 100 = 10 × 10 × 10 = 1000". Some other power of ten numbers also have special names:
When dealing with larger numbers than this, there are two different ways of naming the numbers in English. Under the "long scale" a new name is given every time the number is a million times larger than the last named number. It is also called the "British Standard". This scale used to be common in Britain but is not often used in English-speaking countries today. It is still used in some other European nations. Another scale is the "short scale" under which a new name is given every time a number is a thousand times larger than the last named number. This scale is a lot more common in most English-speaking nations today.
Types of numbers.
Natural numbers.
Natural numbers are the numbers which we normally use for counting, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 etc. Some people say that 0 is a natural number, too.
Another name for these numbers is positive numbers. These numbers are sometimes written as +1 to show that they are different from the negative numbers. But not all positive numbers are natural (for example formula_1 is positive, but not natural).
If 0 is called a natural number, then the natural numbers are the same as the whole numbers. If 0 is not called a natural number, then the natural numbers are the same as the counting numbers. So if the words "natural numbers" are not used, then there will be less confusion about whether zero is included or not. But unfortunately, some say that zero is not a whole number, either, and some say whole numbers can be negative. "Positive integers" and "non-negative integers" are another way to include zero or exclude zero, but only if people know those words.
Negative numbers.
Negative numbers are numbers less than zero.
One way to think of negative numbers is using a "number line". We call one point on this line zero. Then we will label (write the name of) every position on the line by how far to the right of the zero point it is, for example the point one is one centimeter to the right, the point two is two centimeters to the right.
Now think about a point which is one centimeter to the left of the zero point. We cannot call this point one, as there is already a point called one. We therefore call this point minus 1 (−1) (as it is one centimeter away, but in the opposite direction).
A drawing of a number line is below.
All the normal operations of mathematics can be done with negative numbers:
If people add a negative number to another this is the same as taking away the positive number with the same numerals. For example, 5 + (−3) is the same as 5 − 3, and equals 2.
If they take away a negative number from another this is the same as adding the positive number with the same numerals. For example, 5 − (−3) is the same as 5 + 3, and equals 8.
If they multiply two negative numbers together they get a positive number. For example, −5 times −3 is 15.
If they multiply a negative number by a positive number, or multiply a positive number by a negative number, they get a negative result. For example, 5 times −3 is −15.
As finding the square root of a negative number is impossible as negative times negative equals possitve. We simbolise the square root of a negative number as i.
Integers.
Integers are all the natural numbers, all their opposites, and the number zero. Decimal numbers and fractions are not integers.
Rational numbers.
Rational numbers are numbers which can be written as fractions. This means that they can be written as "a" divided by "b", where the numbers "a" and "b" are integers, and "b" is not equal to 0.
Some rational numbers, such as 1/10, need a finite number of digits after the decimal point to write them in decimal form. The number one tenth is written in decimal form as 0.1. Numbers written with a finite decimal form are rational. Some rational numbers, such as 1/11, need an infinite number of digits after the decimal point to write them in decimal form. There is a repeating pattern to the digits following the decimal point. The number one eleventh is written in decimal form as 0.0909090909 ... .
A percentage could be called a rational number, because a percentage like 7% can be written as the fraction 7/100. It can also be written as the decimal 0.07. Sometimes, a ratio is considered as a rational number.
Irrational numbers.
Irrational numbers are numbers which cannot be written as a fraction, but do not have imaginary parts (explained later).
Irrational numbers often occur in geometry. For instance if we have a square which has sides of 1 meter, the distance between opposite corners is the square root of two, which equals 1.414213 ... . This is an irrational number. Mathematicians have proved that the square root of every natural number is either an integer or an irrational number.
One well-known irrational number is pi. This is the circumference (distance around) of a circle divided by its diameter (distance across). This number is the same for every circle. The number pi is approximately 3.1415926535 ... .
An irrational number cannot be fully written down in decimal form. It would have an infinite number of digits after the decimal point. Unlike 0.333333 ..., these digits would not repeat forever.
Real numbers.
Real numbers is a name for all the sets of numbers listed above:
This is all numbers that do not involve imaginary numbers.
Imaginary numbers.
Imaginary numbers are formed by real numbers multiplied by the number i. This number is the square root of minus one (−1).
There is no number in the real numbers which when squared makes the number −1. Therefore, mathematicians invented a number. They called this number i, or the imaginary unit.
Imaginary numbers operate under the same rules as real numbers:
Imaginary numbers were called "imaginary" because when they were first found, many mathematicians did not think they existed. The person who "discovered" imaginary numbers was Gerolamo Cardano in the 1500s. The first to use the words "imaginary number" was René Descartes. The first people to use these numbers were Leonard Euler and Carl Friedrich Gauss. Both lived in the 18th century.
Complex numbers.
Complex numbers are numbers which have two parts; a "real" part and an "imaginary" part. Every type of number written above is also a complex number.
Complex numbers are a more general form of numbers. The complex numbers can be drawn on a number plane. This is composed of a real number line, and an imaginary number line.
 3i|_
 |
 2i|_ . 2+2i
 |
 i|_
 |
 |_____|_____|_____|_____|_____|_____|_____|_____|
 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6
 −i|_ .3−i
 |
 .−2−2i −2i|_
 |
 −3i|_
All of normal mathematics can be done with complex numbers:
To multiply two complex numbers is complicated. It is easiest to describe in general terms, with two complex numbers a + bi and c + di.
formula_2
For example, (4 + 5i) × (3 + 2i) = (4 × 3 − 5 × 2) + (4 × 2 + 5 × 3)i = (12 − 10) + (8 + 15)i = 2 + 23i.
Transcendental numbers.
A real or complex number is called a "transcendental number" if it can not be obtained as a result of an algebraic equation with integer coefficients.
formula_3
Proving that a certain number is transcendental can be extremely difficult. Each transcendental number is also an irrational number. The first people to see that there were transcendental numbers were Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz and Leonhard Euler. The first to actually prove there were transcendental numbers was Joseph Liouville. He did this in 1844.
Well-known transcendental numbers:

</doc>
<doc id="530" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=530" title="November">
November

November is the eleventh and penultimate (second-last) month of the year in the Gregorian calendar, coming between October and December. It has 30 days. Its name is from the Latin word "novem", which meant "nine". It was the ninth month of the year before January and February were added to the Roman Calendar. November begins on the same day of the week as March every year and also February except in leap years.
November's flower is the Chrysanthemum. Its birthstone is the topaz. The meaning of the topaz is [ fidelity].
The Month.
November is the eleventh month of the year in the Gregorian calendar, after October and before December, which is the last month. November has 30 days. It was the ninth month in the old Roman calendar, which is where its name comes from. It kept its name when January and February were added to the beginning of the year, despite becoming the eleventh month. The ninth month is now September.
November begins on the same day of the week as March every year, and also begins on the same day as February in common years. It always ends on the same day of the week as August, as August 31 and November 30 are exactly 13 weeks (91 days) apart.
In the Northern Hemisphere, November is an Autumn (Fall) month, and the further north in the hemisphere, the more likely it is to get colder as December approaches. In the Southern Hemisphere it is a Spring month. In each hemisphere, it is the seasonal equivalent of May in the other.
Several observances around the beginning of the month are believed to be related, linked to the old Celtic celebration of Samhain on November 1. These events include Halloween (October 31), Day of the Dead in Mexico (October 31 to November 2), All Saints Day (November 1) and All Souls Day (November 2).
In several mainly Christian countries, it is month in which people who died in war are commonly remembered, mainly related to the end of World War I on November 11, 1918. Near the end of the month Advent, the period leading up to Christmas, begins.
The astrological signs for November are Scorpio (October 24 to November 22) and Sagittarius (November 23 to December 21). The birth flower is the chrysanthemum and the birth stone is the topaz.

</doc>
<doc id="533" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=533" title="National anthem">
National anthem

A national anthem is a song that the people of a country use to remember and respect their country.
Some countries, like Spain, have a national anthem which has no lyrics (words of a song)
Related pages.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="534" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=534" title="Name">
Name

Name is a word (or a set of words) given to things and people. 
For example, "cat" is the name of a kind of animal. "Ryan" is a name of a person, usually a male. "Julia" is a common female name. 
The word 'name' can also be used as a verb. To name something is to give it a name.
People's names.
In many cultures, there are rules and customs about how to give a person a name. 
Some of the rules are defined by laws, and others are defined by traditions (doing things in the way they have been done for a long time). 
There are rules about different aspects of the names and naming, including the following:
1. Number of parts of a name
In some cultures, a person has a one-part name, such as "ShiningWater." 
In other cultures, a person has a two-part name, such as "John Smith."
In some cultures, a person can have any number of name parts. In the United States, for example, some people have three: first name, middle name, and last name. Other people have only two: a first and last name.
In Chinese cultures, it is typical for a person to have three-part name, such as "Cheah Ching San," where "Cheah" is the surname. Written in English format a comma is introduced making it "Ching San, Cheah."
2. Relations with names of parents and other relatives
In some cultures, people have the same "family name" (or surname) as their parents. For example, the father of John Smith may be Mike Smith. And Mike Smith's father may be James Smith. The "Smith" part is the same for all the family. 
In other cultures, a person has the same name as his or her father, but the name is in a different place. For example, Shafiq Hanif's son may be Hanif Kamal. Hanif is in both the father's and son's name. 
3. Name changes
In some cultures, a name changes when people marry, divorce, go through some religious ceremony, etc. For example, in some Spanish-speaking countries, people use two last names: their mother's father's name and their father's name. If Elena Rodriguez Gomez and Jose Sanchez Soria marry, she may change her name to Elena Rodriguez de Sanchez, and their child could be named Pilar Sanchez Rodriguez, taking the names of both of her grandfathers. 
4. Name origins
In some cultures, personal names come from history. In most European countries, some first names are taken from the Bible. In some cultures, names are taken from a relative. In other cultures, a name shows what the parents hope their child will be like. A baby may be given a name Wisdom because parents hope the baby will be a wise girl or boy. 
Some cultures avoid giving people a name of an animal. For example, there is no name like dog, cat, snake, owl, or fish in Japanese people's first names. But in some cultures animal names may be good. 
5. Lengths, pronunciations, spelling, etc.
In some languages and cultures, you can tell if a word is a person's name or not by just looking at the spelling or listening to its pronunciation. There are some other linguistic patterns. For example, many Chinese names are made up of three syllables. 
6. Use of names, titles, nicknames, etc.
In some cultures, people use names when they call each other. In other cultures, people use their nicknames. In some other cultures, people use their titles ("father," "professor," etc.) when they call each other.
7. Spelling of names, titles, nicknames, etc.
8. Name awareness
Taking note of names is taken a step farther by those who elect to celebrate a name (e.g., "Celebrate Your Name Week") whether their own name, someone else's name, or names in general, complete ownership of one's name might very well include celebrating it. 
9. Middle names
While some people might choose to "hide" a middle name for any number of reasons (i.e., they consider the middle name they were given to be an "embarrassment"), others have taken to celebrating their middle name (e.g., "Middle Name Pride Day").
In the English language, names exclusively are usually pronounced in correlation with the spelling, however can be pronounced as desired, e.g. John is (jon) but can also be (ned). However not probable, is held true in the English rules of grammar.
Examples of names
Sarah, Lucy, Ellen, Claire, Ben.
Names can be shortened e.g. Isabelle can become Izzy or Belle.
Japanese names.
Here are some things that are often found in Japanese names today. In the past, people went by different rules. 
1. Number of parts of a name
Japanese names have two parts. One is the family name and the other is the given name. 
"Suzuki Ichiro" is a name of a Japanese person. Suzuki is the family name, and Ichiro is the first name. In the Japanese language, the family name comes first, and the given name comes second. (It is like writing Smith John, instead of John Smith.)
Only some members of the royal family do not have a family name. 
2. Relations with names of parents and other relatives
A newborn baby gets a family name from their parents. The parents have the same family name. So, a son of Ono Yoko (female) and Ono Ken (male) is Ono something. 
The family name Ono is mostly shared by the paternal (male) part of the family. So Ono Ken's parents have the family name Ono, but Ono Yoko's parents probably do not. 
3. Name changes
Names of people change when they marry and divorce. It is a custom in many parts of the world that women change their family name to that of their new husband when they marry. However, in Europe and North America especially, many women no longer do this even though their mothers and grandmothers may have. Sometimes, the man will take the woman's family name. 
4. Name origins
5. Lengths, pronunciations, spelling, etc. 
6. Use of names, titles, nicknames, etc. 

</doc>
<doc id="535" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=535" title="Niihau">
Niihau

Niihau (or Niʻihau) is the smallest of the inhabited islands of Hawaii, in the United States. It has a land area of 70 sq. miles (184 km2). It is the oldest of the eight main islands.
The whole island is owned by the Robinson family. They bought it from the Kingdom of Hawaii for $10,000. It was said that the buyer, Elizabeth Sinclair (later Sinclair-Robinson), liked the island better than other places such as Waikiki, Pearl Harbor, and the island of Lanai. There is a small US Navy base where a handful of Navy people work.
The island has a few hundred permanent inhabitants. Almost all of them are native Hawaiians. They support themselves largely with small family farms. Many work for the ranch owned by the Robinsons. The native Hawaiians lead a rural, low-tech life. They speak the Hawaiian language and keep traditions alive. This is because Ms. Sinclair promised to help preserve Hawaiian culture and tradition when she bought the island. Niihau is the only one of the Hawaiian islands where the Hawaiian language is the main language.
Niihau is also known as the "Forbidden Island". This is due to the fact that until recently, the island was off-limits to all but family members, US Navy personnel, government officials and expressly invited guests. Now, tourists can go on one of a limited number of supervised tours or hunting safaris.
On the beaches of the island are found shells which are the only shells to be classified as gems. Niihau shells and the jewelry made from them are very popular. Many, especially those with darker and richer color, are collectors items. The sale of shells and shell jewelry brings extra money for the local people.

</doc>
<doc id="536" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=536" title="Nēnē">
Nēnē

For the basketball player, see Nenê.
The Nēnē, or Hawaiian Goose ("Branta sandvicensis") is a species of goose. It is found today on only three Hawaiian islands. It gets its name from its soft call.
This is an unmistakable species, with its generally brown plumage (feathers) and darker head. Its strong toes have much reduced webbing (skin between the toes), an adjustment to the lava flows on which it breeds. The Nēnē goes about on land much more than other water birds. When moulting (dropping old feathers and growing new ones), the Nēnē cannot fly, as do other geese, a factor which made it vulnerable to hunting.
The Nēnē was once among the most threatened waterfowl species around the world. Once common, hunting and predators brought to the islands such as mongooses, pigs and cats reduced the population to only 30 birds in the 1950s. However, this species breeds well in captivity (zoos and bird parks), and has been successfully re-introduced. There are also good numbers in wild bird collections.
The Nēnē is the state bird of Hawaii.
References.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="537" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=537" title="Network">
Network

Template codice_1 has been incorrectly substituted.
A network is a group of things that are connected together using some form of talking or other communication to transfer information or data. An example of a network of computers is the Internet.
Related pages.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="539" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=539" title="Fishing net">
Fishing net

A fishing net is a woven trap usually used to catch fish. They are usually made out of rope. A net is a kind of tool.
Other methods of catching fish.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="540" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=540" title="Internet slang">
Internet slang

Internet slang is slang words which are used on the internet. Most of these words are new, such as Wiki and blog, which were not used before the internet became popular.
Some old words were given new meanings, such as mail (which now means email). There are many mixed metaphors on the Internet, such as boot (which used to mean a shoe) and link (which used to mean a join in a metal chain). Some existing acronyms, such as "AFK" (To mean "Away from keyboard") and "IRL" (To mean "In real life") were used on bulletin board systems before the internet became popular. These are now used on the internet, such as in chat rooms and on instant messenger software.
People have also created some verbs and adjectives to describe things that only happen on the internet:
Shorthand words.
Shorthand is where a word is written in a shorter way because it is quicker and easier to type. It is also done to fit more text into a limited space.
Acronyms.
Internet slang uses many acronyms because they are quicker and easier to type. They are often shorthand for common phrases and idioms, but they can show somebody's emotions and their certainty.
Leet speak.
Leet speak (written as: L33T or 1337) is the most common language on MMORPGs because rude words are not stopped by filters. This language is changing all the time because new words are made and used. A lot of the words use numbers instead of letters but some were made because of typing errors which are now done on purpose. Also, some suffixes are used, such as "-age" and "-ness".
Some of the numbers and symbols used instead of letters are in the table below.

</doc>
<doc id="542" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=542" title="Nauru">
Nauru

Nauru is a small island in the Pacific Ocean. It's 42 kilometers south of the equator and has a surface area of 23.3km². This one island is one country (a republic). It sells phosphate (a chemical) to Australia. Nauru is the smallest republic in the world. English and Nauruan are the official languages of Nauru. Nauru has no official capital, but its biggest city is Yaren. The current president of Nauru is Baron Waqa. There are 14 districts in Nauru:
 "This about a  can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="543" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=543" title="Noun">
Noun

A noun is a kind of word (see part of speech) that is usually the name of something such as a person, place, thing, quality, or idea. In English, nouns can be singular or plural.
Nouns often need a word called an article or determiner (like "the" or "that"). These words usually do not go with other kinds of words like verbs or adverbs. (For example, people do not also describe nouns. In English, there are more nouns than any other kind of word.
Every language in the world has nouns, but they are not always used in the same ways. They also can have different properties in different languages. For example, in some other languages, nouns do not change for singular and plural, and sometimes there is no word for "the".
Some examples of nouns in English are: "time, people, way, year, government, day, world, life, work, part, number, house, syystem, company, end, party, information".
The history of the word "noun".
The word 'noun' comes from the Latin "nomen" meaning "name." Words like nouns were described in early days by the Sanskrit grammarian Pāṇini and ancient Greeks like Dionysios Thrax.
Uses of nouns.
In English sentences, nouns can be used as a subject, object, or complement. They often come after prepositions, as the 'object of preposition'.
Nouns can sometimes describe other nouns (such as a soccer ball). When they do this, they are called modifiers or adjuncts.
There are also verb forms that can be used in the same way as nouns (such as 'I like "running".) These are called "verbals" or "verbal nouns", and include "participles" (which can also be adjectives) and "infinitives".
Kinds of nouns and how they are ordered.
Nouns are ordered into common nouns, and proper nouns. There are also pronouns. These have commonly been considered a different part of speech from nouns, but in the past some grammars have included them as nouns as do many modern linguists.
Proper nouns.
A proper noun (also called proper name) is a name given to individual people, places, companies, or brands. Some examples of proper nouns are: "London, John, God, October, Mozart, Saturday, Coke, Mr. Brown, Atlantic Ocean"
Proper nouns begin with an upper case (capital) letter in English and many other languages that use the Roman alphabet. (However, in German, all nouns begin with an upper case letter.) The word "I" is really a pronoun, although it is capitalized in English, like a proper noun.
Some common nouns (see below) can also be used as proper nouns. For example, someone might be named 'Tiger Smith' -- even though he is not a tiger or a smith.
Common nouns.
Common nouns are all other nouns that are not proper nouns. Sometimes the same word can be either a common noun or a proper noun, depending on how it is used; for example:
Number and countability.
In English and many other languages, nouns have 'number'. But some nouns are only singular (such as "furniture, physics") and others are only plural (such as "clothes, police"). Also, some nouns are 'countable' (they can be counted, for example, "one piece, two pieces") but others are not (for example, we do not say "one furniture, two furnitures").
Possessives.
Nouns are words for things, and since things can be possessed, nouns can also change to show possession in grammar. In English, we usually add an apostrophe and an "s" to nouns to make them "possessive", or sometimes just an apostrophe when there is already an "s" at the end, like this:
How adjectives become nouns.
Most adjectives become nouns by adding the suffix ness. Example: Take the adjective 'natural', add 'ness' to get 'naturalness', a noun. To see a list of 100 adjectives used in Basic English, click here
Plural Nouns.
The plural form of most nouns is created simply by adding the letter "s."
Note that some dictionaries list "busses" as an acceptable plural for "bus." Presumably, this is because the plural "buses" looks like it ought to rhyme with the plural of "fuse," which is "fuses." "Buses" is still listed as the preferable plural form. "Busses" is the plural, of course, for "buss," a seldom used word for "kiss."
There are several nouns that have irregular plural forms. Plurals formed in this way are sometimes called mutated (or mutating) plurals.
And, finally, there are nouns that maintain their Latin or Greek form in the plural. (See media and data and alumni, below.)
References.
3. Plural Noun Forms." "Plural Noun Forms". N.p., n.d. Web. 09 Sept. 2014.

</doc>
<doc id="547" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=547" title="Nature">
Nature

The words nature and natural are used for all the things that are normally not made by humans. Things like weather, organisms, landforms, celestial bodies and much more are part of nature. Scientists study the way the parts of nature work. Things that have been made by people are said to be man-made or called artifacts.
There are natural sciences that study different parts of nature, for example the science of ecology is about plants and animals as a whole, while biology studies every type of living thing.
From one point of view, humans are a prime example of nature, and are the most widely studied natural inhabitants of the planet earth. Humans interact with each other in their natural environment on a constant basis. Every part of nature – everything from the air to the dirt on the ground – is interdependent. Medicine studies humans in health and sickness. 
From another point of view, humans and nature can be said to be in conflict. Nature is often seen by humans as natural resources. People cut down trees to get wood to burn, to build houses, or to make a place to grow food. Fires, cars, and factories make a lot of smoke and harm many places. People who like to leave nature unharmed and those who feel they need to use more of nature often fight about what they should do. In the modern world, with many more people and many big cities, these problems are becoming more serious.
Nature, in the broadest sense, means the physical world as a whole. This is the meaning that physics, the study of nature (etymologically), takes.
Natural.
A useful definition of "natural" is 
Other websites.
 Media related to at Wikimedia Commons
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="552" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=552" title="Natural resource">
Natural resource

A natural resource is anything that people can use which comes from nature. People do not make natural resources, but gather them from the earth. Examples of natural resources are air, water, wood, oil, wind energy, iron, and coal. Refined oil and hydro-electric energy are not natural resources because people make them.
Supply.
We often say there are two sorts of natural resources: renewable resources and non-renewable resources.
Most natural resources are limited. This means they will eventually run out. A perpetual resource has a never-ending supply. Some examples of perpetual resources include solar energy, tidal energy, and wind energy. 
Some of the things influencing supply of resources include whether it is able to be recycled, and the availability of suitable substitutes for the material. Non-renewable resources cannot be recycled. For example, oil, minerals, and other non-renewable resources cannot be recycled.
Demand.
The demand for resources can change with new technology, new needs, and new economics (e.g. changes in cost of the resources). Some material can go completely out of use, if people do not want it any more. Demand of natural resources is very high, but availability is very low
Availability.
All places have their own natural resources. When people do not have a certain resource they need, they can either replace it with another resource, or trade with another country to get the resource. People have sometimes fought to have them (for example, spices, water, arable land, gold, or petroleum).
When people do not have some natural resources, their quality of life can get lower. So, we need to protect our resources from pollution. For example, when they can not get clean water, people may become ill; if there is not enough wood, trees will be cut and the forest will disappear over time (deforestation); if there are not enough fish in a sea, people can die of starvation. Renewable resources include crops, wind, hydroelectric power, fish, and sunlight. Many people carefully save their natural resources so others can use them in future.

</doc>
<doc id="554" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=554" title="Negentropy">
Negentropy

Negentropy is reverse entropy. It means things becoming more in order.
Time in science is defined as the direction of entropy. This makes it very hard to talk about ideas of time that would apply to negentropy or its effects.
Life is considered to be negentropic because it takes things in less order, like dead food, and turns it into things in more order, like cells in the body, tissues, and organs. In doing so, it gives off heat. The outside or skin of an organism is always at maximum entropy because it is removing heat.
Based on several different ideas of entropy, negentropy also would mean several different things. Cliff Joslyn proposed a list of ways to find entropy in ways other than measuring heat as given off by a body. Since it is living things looking for these ways, however, and since they create models that are in more order than the measurements they combine, thinking and science are also negentropic – just a part of life.
The idea that living things order the universe is called the anthropic principle. It has a strong form which says that we are needed to do this. And a weak or obvious form which says if we were not here asking, it would not matter. Cosmology is concerned with this and other issues of where life fits into models of our universe.
Negentropy is not the only idea about life and how it affects our view of time. Most of engineering relies on linear time for risk analysis, economics on cyclic time like the business cycle, and biology explores rhythmic time especially in systems of animal communication. Probably all of these ideas are useful for something, like the many ideas of entropy, and the many ideas of life.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="557" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=557" title="North America">
North America

 
North America is a continent in the Northern and Western hemispheres of Earth. It is to the east of the Pacific Ocean, the West of the Atlantic Ocean, the South of the Arctic Ocean, and the North of South America. It is the northern part of the Americas. The southernmost part is Central America. 
Hundreds of millions of years ago, North America was part of a larger ancient supercontinent named Laurasia. A few million years ago, a new land bridge arose and connected North America to South America. Beringia connected North America to Siberia a few times during ice ages in the past 20,000 years.
Countries.
North America includes these large countries, listed from North to South:
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="558" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=558" title="Neptune">
Neptune

Note: This article contains .
For other uses, see Neptune (disambiguation).
Neptune ( ), ( ) is the eighth and last planet from the Sun in the Solar System. It is a gas giant. It is the fourth largest planet and third heaviest. Neptune has four rings which are hard to see from the Earth. It is 17 times heavier than Earth and is a little bit heavier than Uranus. It was named after the Roman God of the Sea.
Neptune's atmosphere (a layer of gas floating above planets) is mostly made up of hydrogen and helium. It also contains small amounts of methane which makes the planet appear blue. Neptune's blue color is much brighter compared to Uranus', which has a similar amount of methane, so there might be another reason why Neptune is blue. Neptune also has the strongest winds of any planet in the solar system, measured as high as 2,100 km/h or 1,300 mph.
Neptune was discovered by the astronomers, Urbain Le Verrier and John Couch Adams. They were both honored for the discovery. The planet was the first to be discovered by mathematical calculations instead of using a telescope. Because of Uranus' odd movements in its orbit (the line which a planet follows in moving), it made astronomers search for the new planet. The planet was visited by only one spacecraft, "Voyager 2" on August 25, 1989. Neptune once had a huge storm known as the "Great Dark Spot" which was discovered in 1989 by Voyager 2. However, the dark spot was not seen in 1994, and new spots were found since then. It is not known why the dark spot disappeared. However, NASA suggested for a future spacecraft to orbit and learn more about Neptune. The spacecraft was to be shared between the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) and the California Institute of Technology.
History.
Discovery.
The first possible sighting of Neptune is thought to be by Galileo as his drawings showed Neptune near Jupiter. But Galileo was not credited for the discovery since he thought Neptune was a "fixed star" instead of a planet. Because of Neptune's slow movement across the sky, Galileo's small telescope was not strong enough to detect Neptune as a planet.
In 1821, Alexis Bouvard published the astronomical tables of the orbit of Uranus. Later observations showed that Uranus was moving in an irregular way in its orbit, making some astronomers think of another large body being the cause of the irregular motions of Uranus. In 1843, John Couch Adams calculated the orbit of an eighth planet that would possibly be influencing the orbit of Uranus. He sent his calculations to Sir George Airy, the Astronomer Royal, who asked Adams for an explanation. Adams began to make a copy of the reply, but never sent it.
In 1846, Urbain Le Verrier, who was not working with Adams, created his own calculations but also had problems in encouraging any interest with his people. However, in the same year, John Herschel began to support the mathematical method and encouraged James Challis to search for the planet. After much delays, Challis began his unwilling search in July 1846. Meanwhile, Le Verrier had convinced Johann Gottfried Galle to search for the planet.
Although Heinrich d'Arrest was still a student at the Berlin Observatory, he suggested that a newly drawn map of the sky, in the region of Le Verrier's predicted area, could be compared with the current sky to look for the displacement characteristic of a planet, as compared to a fixed star. Neptune was then discovered that very night on September 23, 1846, within 1° of where Le Verrier had predicted it to be, and about 10° from Adams' prediction. Challis later found out that he had seen the planet twice in August, failing to recognize it owing to his careless approach to the work.
After the news of the discovery of Neptune spread, there was also a lot of arguing between the French and the British about who was to be deserved credit for the discovery. Later, an international agreement decided that both Le Verrier and Adams together deserved credit. However, historians are now reviewing the topic after the rediscovery in 1998 of the "Neptune papers" (historical documents from the Royal Greenwich Observatory), which had seemingly been stolen by astronomer Olin Eggen for nearly three decades and were only rediscovered (in his ownership) right after his death. After reviewing the documents, some historians now think that Adams does not deserve equal credit with Le Verrier.
Naming.
Shortly after its discovery, Neptune was temporarily called "the planet exterior to Uranus" or "Le Verrier's planet". The first suggestion for a name came from Galle. He proposed the name "Janus". In England, Challis suggested the name "Oceanus". In France, Arago suggested that the new planet be called "Leverrier", a suggestion which was met with a lot of opposition outside France. French almanacs promptly reintroduced the name "Herschel" for "Uranus" and "Leverrier" for the new planet.
Meanwhile, on separate and different reason, Adams suggested changing the name "Georgian" to "Uranus", while Leverrier (through the Board of Longitude) suggested "Neptune" for the new planet. Struve gave support of that name on December 29, 1846, to the Saint Petersburg Academy of Sciences. Soon "Neptune" was internationally agreed among many people and was then the official name for the new planet. In Roman mythology, Neptune was the god of the sea, identified with the Greek god, Poseidon.
Structure.
Mass and composition.
At 10.243×1025 kg, Neptune's mass puts the planet between Earth and the largest gas giants; Neptune has seventeen Earth masses but just 1/18th the mass of Jupiter. Neptune and Uranus are often considered to be part of a sub-class of gas giant known as "ice giants", given their smaller size and big differences in composition compared to Jupiter and Saturn. In the search for extrasolar planets, Neptune has been used as a reference to determine the size and structure of the discovered planet. Some discovered planets that have similar masses like Neptune are often called "Neptunes". just as astronomers refer to various extra-solar "Jupiters."
The atmosphere of Neptune is made up mostly of hydrogen, with a smaller amount of helium. A tiny amount of methane is also detected in the atmosphere. Important absorption bands of methane happen at wavelengths above 600 nm, in the red and infrared portion of the spectrum. This absorption of red light by the atmospheric methane gives Neptune its blue hue.
Because Neptune orbits so far from the Sun, it gets very little heat with the uppermost regions of the atmosphere at −218 °C (55 K). Deeper inside the layers of gas, however, the temperature rises slowly. Like Uranus, the source of this heating is unknown, but the differences are larger: Neptune is the farthest planet from the Sun, yet its internal energy is strong enough to create the fastest winds seen in the Solar System. Several possible explanations have been suggested, including radiogenic heating from the planet's core, the continued radiation into space of leftover heat made by infalling matter during the planet's birth, and gravity waves breaking above the tropopause.
The structure of the inside of Neptune is thought to be very similar to the structure of the inside of Uranus. There is likely to be a core, thought to be about 15 Earth masses, made up of molten rock and metal surrounded by a mixture of rock, water, ammonia, and methane. The heavy pressures keep the icy part of this surrounding mixture as solids, in spite of the large temperatures near the core. The atmosphere, extending about 10 to 20% of the way towards the center, is mostly hydrogen and helium at high altitudes. More mixtures of methane, ammonia, and water are found in the lower areas of the atmosphere. Very slowly this darker and hotter area blends into the superheated liquid interior. The pressure at the center of Neptune is millions of times more than that on the surface of Earth. Comparing its rotational speed to its degree of oblateness shows that it has its mass less concentrated towards the center unlike Uranus.
Neptune
 Comparison of the size of Neptune and Earth 
Internal structure of Neptune
"The Great Dark Spot", as seen from "Voyager 2"
Weather and magnetic field.
One difference between Neptune and Uranus is the level of [ meteorological] activity that has been observed (seen or measured). When the Voyager spacecraft flew by Uranus in 1986, that winds on that planet were observed to be mild. When Voyager flew by Neptune in 1989, powerful weather events were observed. The weather of Neptune has extremely active storm systems. Its atmosphere has the highest wind speeds in the solar system, thought to be powered by the flow of internal heat. Regular winds in the equatorial region have speeds of around 1,200 km/h (750 mph), while winds in storm systems can reach up to 2,100 km/h, near-supersonic speeds.
In 1989, the Great Dark Spot, a cyclonic storm system the size of Eurasia, was discovered by NASA's "Voyager 2" spacecraft. The storm resembled the Great Red Spot of Jupiter. However, on November 2, 1994, the Hubble Space Telescope did not see the Great Dark Spot on the planet. Instead, a new storm similar to the Great Dark Spot was found in the planet's northern hemisphere. The reason why the Great Dark Spot has disappeared is unknown. One possible theory is that heat transfer from the planet's core disrupted the atmospheric balance and existing circulation patterns. The Scooter is another storm, a white cloud group farther south than the Great Dark Spot. Its nickname was given when it was first noticed in the months leading up to the "Voyager" encounter in 1989: it moved faster than the Great Dark Spot. Later images showed clouds that moved even faster than Scooter. The Wizard's eye/"Dark Spot 2" is another southern cyclonic storm, the second most strongest storm seen during the 1989 encounter. It originally was completely dark, but as "Voyager" came closer to the planet, a bright core developed and is seen in most of the highest resolution images.
Unlike other gas giants, Neptune's atmosphere shows the presence of high clouds making shadows on a thick cloud deck below. Though Neptune's atmosphere is much more active than that of Uranus, both planets are made up of the same gases and ices. Uranus and Neptune are not exactly the same type of gas giants like to Jupiter and Saturn, but are rather ice giants, meaning they have a larger solid core and are also made of ices. Neptune is very cold, with temperatures as low as −224 °C (−372 °F or 49 K) recorded at the cloud tops in 1989.
Neptune also has similarities with Uranus in its magnetosphere, with a magnetic field strongly tilted comparative to its rotational axis at 47° and offset at least 0.55 radii (about 13,500 kilometres) from the planet's physical center. Comparing the magnetic fields of the two planets, scientists think the extreme course may be characteristic of flows in the interior of the planet and not the result of Uranus' sideways rotational movement.
Neptune's Rings.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : Rings of Neptune
Very small blue colored rings have been discovered around the blue planet, but they are not as well known as the rings of Saturn. When these rings were discovered by a team led by Edward Guinan, originally they thought that the rings may not be complete rings. However, this was proven wrong by "Voyager 2". Neptune's planetary rings have a weird "clumpy" arrangement. Although the cause is currently unknown but some scientists think that it may be because of the gravitational contact with small moons that orbit near them.
Proof that the rings are incomplete first began in the mid-1980s, when stellar occultation were found to rarely show an extra "blink" just before or after the planet occulted the star. Pictures from "Voyager 2" in 1989 solved the problem, when the ring system was found to have several faint rings. The farthest ring, Adams, has three famous arcs now named "Liberté", "Egalité", and "Fraternité" (Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity).
The existence of arcs is very hard to understand because the laws of motion would predict that arcs spread out into a single ring in a very short time. The gravitational effects of Galatea, a moon just inward from the ring, are now thought to have created the arcs.
Several other rings were discovered by the "Voyager" cameras. Also with the thin Adams Ring about 63,000 km from the center of Neptune, the Leverrier Ring is at 53,000 km and the wider, smaller Galle Ring is at 42,000 km. A very small outward expansion to the Leverrier Ring has been named Lassell; it is surrounded at its outer edge by the Arago Ring at 57,000 km.
New Earth-based observations published in 2005 appeared to show that Neptune's rings are a lot more unstable than thought before. To be exact, it looks like that the "Liberté" ring might disappear maybe quickly in less than 100 years. The new observations seems to puzzle our understanding of Neptune's rings into a lot of confusion.
Neptune's Moons.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : List of Neptune's moons
Neptune has a total of 14 known moons. As Neptune was the Roman god of the sea, the planet's moons were named after lesser sea gods or goddesses. The largest, and the only one big enough to have the shape of a sphere is Triton, (pronounced:ˈtraɪtən) discovered by William Lassell just 17 days after the discovery of Neptune itself. Unlike all other large planetary moons, Triton has a retrograde orbit, showing that the moon was probably captured, and maybe was once a Kuiper belt object. It is close enough to Neptune to be locked into a synchronous orbit, and is slowly moving into Neptune and will one day be torn apart when it passes the Roche limit. Triton is the coldest object that has been measured in the solar system, with temperatures of −235 °C (38 K, −392 °F). Its diamter is 2700 km, (80% of Earth's Moon, Luna), its mass is 2.15×1022 kg (30% of Luna), its orbital diameter is 354,800 km (90% of Luna) and its orbital period is 5.877 days (20% of Luna).
Neptune's second known moon (by order of distance), the odd moon Nereid, has one of the most unusual orbits of any satellite in the solar system.
From July to September 1989, "Voyager 2" discovered six new moons of Neptune. Of these, the lumpy-shaped Proteus is the biggest known object that has not been shaped into a sphere by its own gravity. Although it is the second most massive Neptunian moon, it has only one quarter of one percent of the mass of Triton. Neptune's closest four moons, Naiad, Thalassa, Despina, and Galatea, orbit close enough to be inside Neptune's rings.
The next farthest out, Larissa was originally discovered in 1981 when it had occulted a star. The moon was credited for causing Neptune's ring arcs when "Voyager 2" observed Neptune in 1989. Five new unusual moons discovered between 2002 and 2003 were announced in 2004. The latest moon was discovered from examining Hubble Telescope imags on July 16, 2013. It is only 12 miles across, allowing it to evade detection even by the Voyager 2 spacecraft. 
Moons
Neptune (top) and Triton (bottom)
Triton
Proteus
Observation.
Neptune cannot be seen with naked eye alone, since Neptune's normal brightness are between magnitudes +7.7 and +8.0, which can be out-shined by Jupiter's Galilean moons, the dwarf planet Ceres, and the asteroids 4 Vesta, 2 Pallas, 7 Iris, 3 Juno and 6 Hebe. A telescope or strong binoculars will show Neptune as a small blue dot, similar in appearance to Uranus. The blue color comes from the methane in its atmosphere. Its small obvious size has made it difficult to study visually; most telescopic data was quite limited until the arrival of the Hubble Space Telescope and large ground-based telescopes with adaptive optics.
With an orbital period (sidereal period) of 164.88 Julian years, Neptune will soon return (for discovery) to the same place in the sky where it was discovered in 1846. This will happen three different times, also with a fourth in which it will come very close to being at that position. These are April 11, 2009, when it will be in prograde motion; July 17, 2009, when it will be in retrograde motion; and February 7, 2010, when it will be in prograde motion. It will also come very close to being at the same point since the 1846 discovery in late October through early-mid November 2010, when Neptune will turn from retrograde to direct motion on the exact degree of Neptune's discovery and will then stop for a moment along the ecliptic within 2 arc minutes at that point (closest on November 7, 2010). This will be the last time for about the next 165 years that Neptune will be at its point of discovery.
This is explained by the idea of retrogradation. Like all planets and asteroids in the Solar System beyond Earth, Neptune goes through retrogradation at certain points during its synodic period. In addition to the start of retrogradation, other events inside the synodic period include astronomical opposition, the return to prograde motion, and conjunction to the Sun.
In its orbit around the Sun, Neptune returned to its original point of discovery in August 2011.
Exploration.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : Exploration of Neptune
Currently, only one spacecraft has visited Neptune. NASA's "Voyager 2" probe made a quick flyby of the planet with its closest encounter on August 25, 1989, and was the last planet to have been visited by at least one spacecraft.
Some of "Voyager 2""s important discoveries was its very close fly-by of Triton where took pictures of several parts of the moon. The probe also discovered the Great Dark Spot, although it has now disappeared after when the Hubble Space Telescope took pictures of Neptune in 1994. Originally thought to be a large cloud or cyclonic storm system, it was later guessed just to be a hole in the visible cloud deck.
Neptune turned out to have the strongest winds of all the solar system's gas giants. In the outer regions of the solar system, where the Sun shines over 1000 times fainter than on Earth (still very bright with a magnitude of -21), the last of the four giants did happen as what the scientists actually expected. One might think that the farther a planet is from the Sun, the less energy and heat there would be to create and run the very strong winds around. The winds on Jupiter were already hundreds of kilometres per hour. Rather than seeing slower winds, the scientists found faster winds (over 1600 km/h) on more distant Neptune.
One possible guess for the cause of the faster wind speeds is that if enough energy is produced, turbulence is created, which slows the winds down (like those of Jupiter). At Neptune however, there is so little solar energy that once winds are started they meet very little resistance, and are able to keep very high speeds. Anyhow, Neptune gives out more energy than it gets from the Sun, and the internal energy source of these winds remains undetermined.
The pictures sent back to Earth from "Voyager 2" in 1989 became the basis of a PBS all-night program called "Neptune All Night".
Other websites.
 Find more information on Neptune by searching one of Wikipedia's :
 Dictionary definitions from Wiktionary<br>
 from Wikibooks<br>
 from Wikiquote<br>
 from Wikisource<br>
 from Commons<br>
 from Wikinews<br>
 from Wikiversity<br>
 from Wikispecies<br>
 from Wikidata<br>
 from MediaWiki
Future missions to Neptune

</doc>
<doc id="561" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=561" title="Negative">
Negative

Negative may mean:
 
 

</doc>
<doc id="564" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=564" title="Now">
Now

Now is the time span between the past and the future. It can be long (like an eon in geologic time) or short (like a picosecond) but it is almost always used to refer to the span between the present instant to some time horizon when a decision must be made. It can be used to ask or demand that someone make a decision even if they want to delay.
"I want to know what you think, now."
"What do you think now?"
"Now is the time for all good people to come to the aid of their country."
Mathematics and measurement assume that everything used in one equation equals the same quantities at the beginning of calculation or axiomatization as at the end. That means it is mathematically correct to say that the idea of "equal" means "equal from the time the process starts to the time it ends." In General Semantics and E Prime the words equal, remain (for the past until now) and become (for now into the future) replace the verb "to be" for this reason.
Algebra is now often called snapshot algebra or algebra of seeing because of this dependence on time. If any action or event were possible between steps in algebraic analysis, then, in theory, one would have to start over as if one had no knowledge of the new state at all. For these reasons the idea of statistics and also knowledge and knowledge management are sometimes questioned, for instance, in the book "Lies, Damn Lies, and Statistics". A major issue is the comparing of numbers gathered in the past, and now, after some key conditions change.

</doc>
<doc id="566" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=566" title="New York City">
New York City

New York City is the largest city in the United States and New York. Over 8 million people live in it, and over 22 million people live in and around it. It is in the state of New York, which is in the northeastern United States.
History.
The oldest part of the city, the island of Manhattan, still has its original Lenape Native American name. Although Native people such as the Lenape and Canarsees had lived there for many thousands of years, New York City was first explored by Europeans in the 1500s. Florentine explorer Giovanni da Verrazzano found the entrance to New York Harbor in the year 1524 and English explorer Henry Hudson named the Hudson River in 1609.
New York City was settled by Europeans from The Netherlands in 1624. The Dutch called the whole area of New York "Nieuw Nederland" (New Netherland) and they named a fort and town on the south end of Manhattan Island Nieuw Amsterdam (New Amsterdam), after the capital city of the Netherlands, which was to become present-day New York. The English took over the colony in 1664 during the second Anglo-Dutch War. They changed the name to New York, to honor the Duke of York, who later became King James II of England. The Dutch surrendered Nieuw Amsterdam without fighting. They were afraid of the English Royal Navy, so they traded the town to England for the colony of Surinam in South America, which they thought was worth more money.
By the time the English took New York, there were many other Dutch towns in what would become New York City, including Breukelen (Brooklyn), Vlissingen (Flushing), and Nieuw Haarlem (Harlem). There were already some English towns in the area also, such as Gravesend in Brooklyn and Newtown in Queens. Dutch, English and other people had been living together in New York for a long time.
New York quickly grew to become a large and important port city. The important Battle of Long Island of the American Revolution was fought in Brooklyn in 1776. New York was the capital of the United States under the Articles of Confederation from 1785 to 1788. When the US Constitution was made, it stayed as the capital from 1789 until 1790.
In 1898, the cities of New York and Brooklyn came together with the Bronx, Staten Island, and the towns in Queens County to make Greater New York. This is the total area of the City of New York today. Around this time, many new immigrants came into New York City. They came in at Ellis Island, an island in New York's harbor near the Statue of Liberty. Many of them then moved to the Lower East Side neighborhood in Manhattan, which had over a million people living in just a few square miles.
Geography.
Most of New York City is on three islands near the Atlantic Ocean, although one part is on the mainland of North America. The city includes all of Manhattan Island and Staten Island, and the western end of Long Island. There are also many smaller islands.
The city is divided into five major parts called "boroughs". Each one is also a county. They are:
Water divides several parts of the city. Part of the Hudson River forms the border between Manhattan and the Bronx on one side, and the State of New Jersey on the other side. The East River forms the border between Manhattan on one side, and Brooklyn and Queens on the other side. The Harlem River forms the border between Manhattan and the Bronx (except for a small part of Manhattan that is on the mainland). Part of Long Island Sound separates the Bronx and Queens. Newtown Creek is part of the border between Brooklyn and Queens. Some parts of the city are very separate from the others because of water, such as Rockaway in Queens and City Island in the Bronx. A small piece of land in Manhattan is international territory and belongs to the United Nations Headquarters.
The hallmark of New York city is its many skyscrapers, especially in Manhattan. In New York City there are about 5600 skyscrapers. 48 of them are over 200 metres tall, which is the highest number of skyscrapers in one area in the world.
Climate.
New York's climate is between humid subtropical and humid continental. The hottest temperature every in New York City is 106 °F and the coldest temperature ever is -13 °F. In 2012, Hurricane Sandy hit New York City, causing part of Manhattan to lose power. New York City gets some snow in winter.
People.
New York City currently has over 8 million people. Over 18 million people live in the city and nearby areas. The majority of the people in New York City belong to ethnic groups that are minorities in the US. New York City has had large numbers of immigrants for centuries. In the early 19th Century, they came from Ireland and Germany. Later in the 19th century, they came from Italy, Russia and Eastern Europe. Today, many are from Puerto Rico, Haiti, the Dominican Republic and Colombia.
Government.
The mayor of New York is Bill de Blasio, a Democrat. The city also has a City Council that makes some local laws. Most laws in New York City are set by the state government in Albany.
Transportation.
Subway transportation is provided by the New York City Subway system, one of the biggest in the world. Pennsylvania Station, the busiest train station in the United States, is here.
John F. Kennedy International Airport, which is in the Queens neighborhood of New York, is one of the busiest airports in the United States.

</doc>
<doc id="569" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=569" title="October">
October

October is the tenth month of the year in the Gregorian calendar, coming between September and November. It has 31 days. The name comes from the Latin "oct" for "eight". It was the eighth month of the year before January and February were added to the beginning of the year.
The Month.
October is the tenth month of the year in the Gregorian calendar, coming after September and before November. It has 31 days. Its name comes from Latin "oct", meaning eight, as it was the eighth month of the year in the Old Roman Calendar before January and February were added to the beginning of the year, though its name did not change. The tenth month at the time was December.
October is an Autumn (Fall) month in the Northern Hemisphere and a Spring month in the Southern Hemisphere. In each Hemisphere, it is the seasonal equivalent of April in the other.
October begins on the same day of week as January in common years, but no month begins on the same day as October in a leap year. It always ends on the same day of the week as February, though also ends on the same day of the week as January in common years.
October 31/November 1 is Samhain in old Pagan tradition. Several current observances at this time are believed to be related to it. They are: Halloween (October 31) in many western traditions, All Saints Day (November 1), All Souls Day (November 2), and the Day of the Dead (October 31 to November 2), which is celebrated in Mexico.
October's flower is the Calendula. One of its birthstones is the opal. The meaning of the opal is hope. The other birthstone of October is the pink tourmaline. The astrological signs for October are Libra (September 24 to October 23) and Scorpio (October 24 to November 22).

</doc>
<doc id="570" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=570" title="Of">
Of

Of is a preposition used in the English language to show a possessive relationship. For example, the phrase "book of maps" means that the book has maps. The phrase "father of Mike" means the father that is being mentioned is Mike's father.

</doc>
<doc id="571" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=571" title="1 (number)">
1 (number)

One (1) is a natural number after zero and before two.
It represents a single item.
A human typically has one {head, nose, mouth, and navel (belly-button)}.
The Roman numeral is I.
Mathematics.
In mathematics, one is also the only number with this special fact: Any number multiplied by 1 equals that number.
Then, the number 1 divides any number but it is not divided by any except itself. The number 1 divides any number to give that same number but it cannot be divided by any other number to give one as the answer. Let "n" be any number. Then "n"/1 = "n" but 1/"n" is never 1 (when n is not 1). Example: 7/1 = 7 but 1/7 is not 1 but 0.142857 ...
Any number divided by itself always gives 1 as the answer. "n"/"n" = 1 (when n is not 0). Example: 7/7 = 1.
Computer science.
The number one is important for computer science because it is, together with zero, a part of the binary numeral system. In machine code and in lots of programming languages one means true. Zero means false.

</doc>
<doc id="572" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=572" title="O Canada">
O Canada

O Canada is the national anthem of Canada. 
Calixa Lavallée wrote the music; Adolphe-Basile Routhier wrote the words in French. It was first sung in French in 1880. Robert Stanley Weir wrote English words for the song in 1908.
It was sung as the national anthem for many years before the government made it official in 1980. 
Here are the words, explained in Simple English:
 O Canada! Our home and native land, 
 True patriot love in all thy sons command! 
 With glowing hearts we see thee rise 
 The True North strong and free, 
 From far and wide, O Canada, 
 We stand on guard for thee. 
 God keep our land glorious and free! 
 O Canada, we stand on guard for thee; 
 O Canada, we stand on guard for thee.
Here are the words in French. The words in French and English do not mean the same thing.
 Ô Canada! Terre de nos aĩeux, 
 Ton front est ceint de fleurons glorieux! 
 Car ton bras sait porter l'épée, 
 Il sait porter la croix! 
 Ton histoire est une épopée 
 Des plus brillants exploits. 
 Et ta valeur de foi trempée 
 Protégera nos foyers et nos droits; 
 Protégera nos foyers et nos droits. 
Trademarking on Olympics slogan.
VANOC has trademarked "with glowing hearts®" and "Des plus brillants exploits®" as the slogan of 2010 Winter Olympics and they say that they will file a lawsuit if someone sang those lines.

</doc>
<doc id="573" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=573" title="Oahu">
Oahu

Oahu (or Oʻahu) is the third largest of the Hawaiian Islands, in the United States. It means "the gathering place" (a place where people meet) in the Hawaiian language. Most of the people of Hawaii live there (1.2 million of the state's 1.7 million in the mid-1990s). The total land area is 608 mi2. Honolulu, the capital city of Hawaii, is on this island. Other well-known places on Oahu are Waikiki, Pearl Harbor, Diamond Head, Hanauma Bay, Kaneohe Bay, and both the North Shore and Makaha (which are famous for very big ocean waves). 
Kamehameha I made Oahu his capital when he became the first king of Hawaii. Iolani Palace was built later on by others of the royal family. It is the only royal palace on American soil. 
Oahu was perhaps the first of the Hawaiian Islands which the crew of "HMS Resolution" saw on 18 January 1778. This was during Captain James Cook's third Pacific Ocean trip. Europeans did not land on Oahu until 28 February 1779 when Captain Clerke of the "HMS Resolution" stepped ashore at Waimea Bay. Clerke took command of the ship after Captain Cook was killed at Kealakekua Bay on February 14.
Today, Oahu has become a tourism and shopping center. Almost 7 million visitors (mainly from the American mainland and Japan) go there every year to enjoy the special island holiday found only in Hawaii.
Oahu can be seen in hundreds of movies and TV shows. Some of them are "Magnum, P.I.", "Lost", "Hawaii Five-O" and "Jake and the Fatman".
 Find more information on Oahu by searching one of Wikipedia's :
 Dictionary definitions from Wiktionary<br>
 from Wikibooks<br>
 from Wikiquote<br>
 from Wikisource<br>
 from Commons<br>
 from Wikinews<br>
 from Wikiversity<br>
 from Wikispecies<br>
 from Wikidata<br>
 from MediaWiki

</doc>
<doc id="575" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=575" title="Open content">
Open content

Open content is when someone creates something and lets others copy it or change it without having to ask for permission. Any media can be open content, from text and pictures to video and sound.
When someone creates something (like a picture or book), they can make that work "open". This means that other people are allowed to copy it and change it if they want. Something that is open content may be free of charge, but it does not have to be. 
The Simple English Wikipedia is open content. So are other Wikipedias. If a person changes open content or makes new open content, everyone can give it to anyone else, or even sell it. It is never needed to ask permission to do this, because the people who wrote the text already gave their permission when they clicked the Save button.
License.
The rules that say how people can use, change and pass around open content are called a license. A license explains exactly what you are allowed to do with the content that falls under it. Licenses are often written in difficult lawyer language ("legalese"), but many licenses have summaries that are much easier to understand.
The makers of open content get to choose what license to use for their work, and everyone else has to follow it. Only the maker, who owns the copyright, can change it to another license. Most open content licenses say that when others change the work, they must also declare it to be open and under the same license. This is called "share-alike" and means that anything based on work will always be open content.
All the content in Wikipedia is open under the rules of the GNU Free Documentation License, a very well-known open content license. Other well-known open content licenses are the Creative Commons licenses.

</doc>
<doc id="577" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=577" title="Orthography">
Orthography

Orthography is an official or correct way to write a particular language. It includes rules of spelling. Orthography may also include rules about punctuation, capitalization, and diacritics (e.g. accents). In English, spelling is a problem for all learners, and is the main isssue in orthography.
Fixed spelling of English words was not done by any king or government. It was the work of the early printers. They had to decide how particular words would be spelled in their books. Gradually the number of alternative spellings began to drop. The word which is "merry" today was spelled in about 30 ways in written sources from the 9th to the 16th century.p970
English orthography.
English orthography, or English spelling, is the way the 26 letters of the alphabet are used to write down the 36 (IPA) sounds of English. The first manuscripts in Old English were written using the Latin alphabet. It had 24 letters.p16 
Vowels.
No alphabet fits its language exactly. One reason for this is that there are always more sounds than letters. In English there are far more vowel sounds than vowels. The ancient Greeks, who were the first to use letters for vowels, decided to use only a few letters for their vowel sounds. This choice influenced all later alphabets:
English would need about 20 vowels to represent the vowel phonemes (~sounds) in common use,p237 and some languages do have more letters for vowels. The Georgian language has a total of 41 letters. A shorter alphabet works by using two or three letters for a single sound, or one letter for several sounds.
Consonants.
The English alphabet has only three consonants which have one sound, cannot be produced by other combinations and are never silent: n, r and v. The English language uses 22 to 26 consonant phonemes.
Dialects.
The other reason that alphabets never exactly fit languages is dialect. A spoken language varies from place to place and from time to time. This is very obvious with English, as the pronunciation is so different in different parts of the world. A written language will always be less flexible than its spoken parent. It has a different function, and is produced mechanically. It must serve everyone who speaks the language, and it does this by keeping the spelling similar from one time to another.
Therefore, all alphabets have sounds which are difficult to represent with the letters in use. And English also has other problems: sounds that can be written in different ways, and spelling which can be pronounced in different ways. This all gives rise to problems of spelling.
British and American English.
Differences between American English and British English spelling came about mainly as the result of one man. Noah Webster (1758–1843) wrote a "Grammar", a "Spelling" book, and finally an "American dictionary of the English language". In the course of this, he proposed a number of simplifications in spelling. In his dictionary, he chose "s" over "c" in words like "defense", he changed the "re" to "er" in words like "center", he dropped one of the Ls in "traveler". At first he kept the u in words like colour or favour but dropped it in later editions. He also changed "tongue" to "tung": that did not stick. His main reason was to help children learn to read and write. Webster's dictionary contained seventy thousand words, of which twelve thousand had never appeared in a published dictionary before. 
Webster did create a slightly different identity for American English. But, because his efforts left the most glaring problems untackled, his variations make little difference to the way the language is used. An example of the real problems in English orthography is the word ending "-ough", which is pronounced several different ways: tough, bough, cough... The root causes of spelling variation are historical, and loan words come with their own (foreign) spelling. Either all French loan words should be left as they were, or they all should be changed. Either we should move wholesale to a more phonetic spelling, or not. This was proposed by many people since Webster, such as George Bernard Shaw, who proposed a new phonetic alphabet for English. In some cases Webster's changes have been widely adopted in Britain: the spelling "programme" came from the French; US "program" is clearly simpler, and more consistent with word endings in English. In our modern world, English orthography is still a problem. In some countries (notably, France) a national committee can give advice and direction as to spelling. English has long escaped from national custody. 
Dictionaries and phonetics.
Modern British spelling and use was greatly influenced by the two great English dictionaries, Samuel Johnson's "A dictionary of the English language" (1755), and James Murray's "Oxford English Dictionary". Johnson's dictionary was hugely influential, abroad as well as at home. The dictionary was exported to America. 
For American lexicographers, the dictionary was impossible to ignore: 
Some people argue which language is the easiest to spell. People who learn a second language tend to think that their first (native) language is the easiest. However, for the learner, programmatic languages, with well-defined rules, are easier to start with than English. The spelling of the English language is by far the most irregular of all alphabetic spellings and thus the most difficult to learn. English is, in its origin, a Germanic language. From its early roots as Anglo-Saxon, it has borrowed words from many other languages: French (a Romance language) and Latin are the most frequent donors to English.
Languages that use phonetic spelling are easier to learn to spell than others. With phonetic spelling the words are spelled as they are pronounced. The Italian word "orologio" for instance is pronounced oh-ro-LO-jo ("gi" always making a "j" sound.) In English, one comes across the word "knife". In "knife", the "k" is not spoken, even though in English it's more common to pronounce "K"s when they are in words.
History of English spelling.
One of the problems we have is that similar sounding words may be spelt quite differently. Rough and ruff; meet and meat; great and grate. Words with complicated spelling may be pronounced simply: Leicester is pronounced 'Lester'. Even what rules we do have are frequently broken. ""i" before "e" except after "c"" has over 100 exceptions.p272 Almost all these problems have come about for historical reasons. English has been changing for the last thousand years, and as the language changes, so parts of it get stuck with different spellings. 
Here are some of the causes of English orthography:
English has a huge number of words, but its spelling comes from many different sources. "The large and varied lexicon of English has been bought at the expense of an increasingly deversified graphology".p275
Differences between languages.
Some languages have a high correspondence between phonemes and letters. That means they get close to one letter for each sound. If there was a perfect correspondence, that language would have "phonemic orthography". English is highly non-phonemic. It has almost every kind of deviation known:
This field of study is called "orthographic depth". The orthographic depth of an alphabetic script is the degree to which a written language deviates from simple one-to-one letter–phoneme correspondence. It shows how easy it is to predict the pronunciation of a word from its spelling. Shallow orthographies are easy to pronounce based on the written word, and deep orthographies are difficult to pronounce based on how they are written. In shallow orthographies, the spelling-sound correspondence is direct: given the rules of pronunciation, one is able to "say" the word correctly.
Most other international languages have similar problems: in French, Arabic or Hebrew, new readers have difficulty learning to decode words. As a result, children learn to read more slowly. In both Spanish and Italian there is a more direct connection between spelling and pronunciation. Those are languages with low orthographic depth.

</doc>
<doc id="578" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=578" title="Oil">
Oil

The word oil is used for many different kinds of liquids. Oil usually does not mix with water.
Some oils are made from plants and used in foods and for cooking. Some kinds of plant oils that people use are African oil palm, maize ("corn"), olive, peanut, soy, and sunflower.
Other kinds of oil are made from crude oil ("petroleum") which comes from under the ground. People use large oil wells to bring the oil up to the surface. The oil is sent in special ships called tankers or in pipelines to factories called refineries where it is distilled into LPG, gasoline ("petrol"), diesel fuel, and fuel oil. Plastics are also normally made from crude oil. Oils from crude oil are also used as fuels for engines or as lubricants to make the parts of machines work together without sticking or stopping.
Different kinds of oils are also used for many other things, for example to make cosmetics, medicines, paints, and detergents, like washing up liquids. Soap(s) are similar to detergents, but they are generally made from animal fat(s) rather than oils.
There is also synthetic oil.

</doc>
<doc id="579" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=579" title="OK">
OK

OK (okay) is a word in the English language. It is used to mean that something is good or correct.
It can often be used instead of the word Yes. It is not certain where the word "OK" originally comes from, but some experts say it came from a funny way of writing "Ol Korrect" (All correct). 
It is also the two-letter abbreviation for the state of Oklahoma in the United States of America.
You also find the phrase "Ola kala" in Greek, which means something like "Everything fine".
Background.
The term appears to have achieved prominence in the United States in 1840, when supporters of the American Democratic political party claimed during the 1840 United States presidential election that it stood for "Old Kinderhook," a nickname for a Democratic presidential candidate, Martin Van Buren, a native of Kinderhook, New York. "'Vote for OK' was snappier than using his Dutch name." In response, Whig opponents attributed "OK", in the sense of "Oll Korrect," to Andrew Jackson's bad spelling. The country-wide publicity surrounding the election appears to have been a critical event in "okay"'s history, widely and suddenly popularizing it across the United States.

</doc>
<doc id="584" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=584" title="Oxymoron">
Oxymoron

An oxymoron is a term for a figure of speech. It is made up of two or more words that seem to be opposite to each other, or actually are opposite.
For example, the words "Wise fool", "Warm freezer", "Legal murder" all have two words. In each one, the one word looks like the opposite of the other word.
You can have words that look opposite, but are right. For example, a "warm freezer" could be right. A freezer could be warm if it was turned off or left open.
The word oxymoron is an oxymoron; 'oxy' comes from the Greek word that means 'sharp', while 'moron' comes from the Greek word that means 'dull'.
Words that really are opposite to each other, would be words that just cannot be put together. For example, a "round square" could not happen because squares are not round.
Oxymorons sometimes appear in jokes. Sometimes, the joke is just to say that a pair of words are an oxymoron. For example, a joke that says that "honest politician" is an oxymoron. This means that politicians are dishonest, if the word 'politician' is opposite to 'honest'.

</doc>
<doc id="587" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=587" title="Operating system">
Operating system

An operating system (also called an OS) is a piece of software that is needed to run the programs on a computer or a mobile device. The programs that run on an operating system talk to the hardware.
Common families of operating systems.
An operating system must be made up of different parts: (these can change depending on the operating system)
What an operating system does.
Most ordinary computer users take their operating system for granted. The easiest way to understand what an operating system does is to take a close look at what computers were like before operating systems were invented.
The earliest electronic computers did not have any operating system. If the user wanted to change what the computer was doing, the user had to open the back panel on the (then very large) computer, and change how the wires were connected. Changing what the computer did was very time consuming and required an expert.
Later, computer scientists decided to have the wires stay as they were, and feed instructions to the computer with punched cards (cards with holes that represented instructions) or magnetic tape. The computer would store the instructions in some kind of memory. This way of operating a computer is called the von Neumann architecture.
Still, computers of the time generally only had enough memory to "remember" one program at a time. If the user wanted the computer to run a different program, the user had to wipe out the first program from memory and then load another program into memory.
Computer operators and computer scientists grew tired of carrying around large stacks of punch cards. They also wanted computers to run more than one program at a time. As years of work changed or replaced computers to have more memory, computer operators and computer scientists discovered that some computers could hold several programs in their memory. The computer user could then simply choose which program the user wanted to run. Running a computer this way requires a "boss" program that controls all the other programs, and asks the user what program the user wants to run. Such a boss program is called an operating system.
Having several programs in memory that can be run at any time makes some new problems. The operating system itself has to remember where the programs are at in memory. The operating system also has to prevent two programs from fighting over which one gets to use the processor.
Modern desktop or laptop computers need an operating system so that they can operate. They are usually sold with it already installed. Operating systems normally start up automatically when the user turns on the computer.
Differences.
Operating systems can also have other differences:

</doc>
<doc id="590" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=590" title="Philosophy">
Philosophy

A philosophy is a way of thinking about the world, the universe, and about society. A philosophy is a group of ideas, worked out by a philosopher (someone who has studied ways of thinking about the world). The ideas in philosophy are "abstract", which means that they are "things that cannot be touched". But this does not mean that philosophy is not about the real world. Ethics, for example, asks what we should do in our everyday lives, and metaphysics asks about how the world works and of what it is made.
Sometimes people talk about how they have a "personal philosophy", which means the way a person thinks about the world. This article is "not" about people's "personal philosophies." This article is about the ideas that have been thought about by philosophers (people who think and write about ways of thinking) for a long time. 
For thousands of years philosophers have asked questions, such as: "Is there any knowledge in the world which is so certain that no reasonable man could doubt it?".
History.
The word "philosophy" comes from two Greek words, meaning "love of wisdom". φίλος adj. "beloved" + σοφία fem. noun "wisdom".
There are different types of philosophy from different times and places. Some philosophers came from Ancient Greece, such as Plato and Aristotle. Others came from Asia, such as Confucius or Buddha. Some philosophers are from the Middle Ages in Europe, such as William of Ockham or Saint Thomas Aquinas. 
Philosophers from the 1600s, 1700s, and 1800s included Thomas Hobbes, René Descartes, John Locke, David Hume, and Immanuel Kant. Philosophers from the 1900s included Ludwig Wittgenstein and Jean-Paul Sartre.
Areas of inquiry.
Philosophy is the study of humans and the world by thinking and asking questions. It is a science and an art. Philosophy tries to answer important questions by coming up with answers about real things and asking "why?"
Sometimes, philosophy tries to answer the same questions as religion and science. Philosophers do not all give the same answers to questions. Some people think there are no right answers in philosophy, only better answers and worse answers. Many types of philosophy criticize or even attack the beliefs of science and religion. 
In his work "Critique of Pure Reason", Immanuel Kant asked the following questions:
The answers to these questions gives the different domains or categories of philosophy.
Categories in philosophy.
Philosophy can be divided into different groups, based on the types of questions that it asks. Below is a list of questions split into groups. One possible list of answers to these questions can be called a 'philosophy'. There are many different 'philosophies', because all of these questions have many different answers according to different people. Not all philosophies ask the same questions. These are the questions that are usually asked by philosophers from the Western world:
Metaphysics:
Metaphysics is sometimes split up into ontology (the philosophy of real life and living things), the philosophy of mind and the philosophy of religion; but these sub-branches are very close together.
"Ontology":
"The philosophy of mind":
"The philosophy of religion":
In epistemology:
In ethics:
In aesthetics:
In logic:
In axiology:
Other divisions include eschatology, teleology and theology. In past centuries natural science was included in philosophy, and called "natural philosophy".
Is philosophy good or bad?
Does philosophy do any good? Very few people would dispute this. It is easy to argue that philosophy is a good thing, because it helps people to think more clearly. Philosophy helps people to understand the world and the way people act and think. Philosophers believe that asking philosophical questions is useful because it brings wisdom and helps people to learn about the world and each other. Some philosophers might even argue that the question "Is philosophy good or bad?" is a philosophical question itself.
However, some people think that philosophy is harmful, as philosophy encourages free-thinking and often questions the beliefs that others hold. For example, philosophies such as some existentialist views say that there is no meaning to life or human existence, except the meaning that we make up or invent. People from some religions do not agree with the beliefs of existentialism.
It should be noted that every major science, including physics, biology, and chemistry are all disciplines that originally were considered philosophy. As speculation and analysis about nature became more developed, these subjects branched away. This is a process that continues even today; psychology only split in the past century. In our own time, subjects such as consciousness studies, decision theory, and applied ethics have increasingly found independence from philosophy as a whole. Because of this, philosophy seems useful because it makes new kinds of science.
What philosophers do.
Philosophers ask questions about ideas (concepts). They try to find answers to those questions. Some thinkers find it very hard to find those words that best describe the ideas they have. When they find answers to some of these questions philosophers often have the same problem, that is how to best tell the answers they found to other people. Depending on the meaning of the words they use, the answers change. 
Some philosophers are full-time thinkers (called academics), who work for universities or colleges. These philosophers write books and articles about philosophy and teach classes about philosophy to university or college students.
Other philosophers are just "hobby" thinkers who think about philosophy during their free time. A small number of hobby thinkers have thought so much about philosophy that they are able to write articles for philosophy magazines. Other people approach philosophy from another job. For example monks, artists, and scientists may think about philosophical ideas and questions.
Most philosophers work by asking questions and looking for good definitions (meanings) of words to help them understand what a question means.
Some philosophers say the only thing needed to answer a question is to find out what it means, and that the only thing that makes philosophical questions such as those above difficult is that people do not really know what they mean (for example Ludwig Wittgenstein).
Philosophers will also often use both real and imaginary examples to make a point. For example, they may write about a real or fictional person in order to show what they think a good person or a bad person is like.
Some philosophers look for the simplest way to answer a question and say that is probably the right answer. This is a process called Occam's razor. Others believe that complicated answers to questions can also be right. For an example of a philosophical problem, see the God paradox.
Philosophers use logic to solve problems and answer questions. Logical consistency is a cornerstone of any acceptable theory. Philosophers who disagree with a theory will often try to find a logical contradiction within the theory. If they can find one, this gives them a reason to reject that theory. If they cannot find any inconsistency, the philosopher might try to show that the theory leads to a conclusion which is either unacceptable or ridiculous. This second approach is usually called reductio ad absurdum.
Some philosophers.
People listed here should be genuine philosophers, rather than social or political campaigners.

</doc>
<doc id="591" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=591" title="Physics">
Physics

Template codice_1 has been incorrectly substituted.
Physics, a branch of science, is the study of all forces and their impacts on the environment. Modern physics connects ideas together about the four laws of symmetry and conservation (energy, momentum, charge, and parity). The word "physics" comes from the Greek word ἡ φύσις "nature".
Definition.
Physics is the study of energy and matter in space and time and how they are related to each other. Physicists assume the existence of mass, length, time and electric current and then define (give the meaning of) all other physical quantities in terms of these basic units. Mass, length, time, and electric current are never defined but the standard units used to measure them are always defined. In the International System of Units (abbreviated SI from the French Système International), the kilogram is the basic unit of mass, the metre is the basic unit of length, the second is the basic unit of time, the Ampere is the basic unit of electric current.
In addition to these four units, there are three other ones: the mole, which is the unit of the quantity of matter, the candela which measures the luminous intensity (the power of lighting) and the Kelvin, the unit of temperature.
Physics studies how things move, and the forces that make them move. For example, velocity and acceleration are used by physics to show how things move. Also, physicists study the forces of gravity, electricity, magnetism and the forces that hold things together. 
Physics studies very large things, and very small things. For instance, physicists can study stars, planets and galaxies but could also study small pieces of matter, such as atoms and electrons.They may also study sound, light and other waves. As well as that, they could examine energy, heat and radioactivity, and even space and time. 
Physics not only helps people understand how objects move, but how they change form, how they make noise, how hot or cold they will be, and what they are made of at the smallest level.
Physics and Mathematics.
Physics is a quantitative science because it is based on measuring with numbers. Maths is used in physics to make models that try to guess what will happen in nature. The guesses are compared to the way the real world works. Physicists are always working to make their models of the world better.
Advanced knowledge.
General description.
Physics is the science of matter and how matter interacts. Matter is any physical material in the universe. Everything is made of matter. Physics is used to describe the physical universe around us, and to predict how it will behave. 
Physics is the science concerned with the discovery and characterization of the universal laws which govern matter, movement and forces, and space and time, and other features of the natural world.
Breadth and goals of physics.
The sweep of physics is broad, from the smallest components of matter and the forces that hold it together, to galaxies and even larger things. There are only four forces that appear to operate over this whole range. However, even these four forces (gravity, electromagnetism, the weak force associated with radioactivity, and the strong force which holds protons and neutrons in an atom together) are believed to be different parts of a single force. 
Physics is mainly focused on the goal of making ever simpler, more general, and more accurate rules that define the character and behavior of matter and space itself. 
One of the major goals of physics is making theories that apply to everything in the universe. In other words, physics can be viewed as the study of those universal laws which define, at the most basic level possible, the behavior of the physical universe.
Physics uses the scientific method.
Physics uses the scientific method. That is, data from experiments and observations are collected. Theories which attempt to explain these data are produced. Physics uses these theories to not only describe physical phenomena, but to model physical systems and predict how these physical systems will behave. Physicists then compare these predictions to observations or experimental evidence to show whether the theory is right or wrong.
The theories that are well supported by data and are especially simple and general are sometimes called scientific laws. Of course, all theories, including those known as laws, can be replaced by more accurate and more general laws, when a disagreement with data is found.
Physics is quantitative.
Physics is more quantitative than most other sciences. That is, many of the observations in physics may be represented in the form of numerical measurements. Most of the theories in physics use mathematics to express their principles. Most of the predictions from these theories are numerical. This is because of the areas which physics has addressed are more amenable to quantitative approaches than other areas. Sciences also tend to become more quantitative with time as they become more highly developed, and physics is one of the oldest sciences.
Fields of physics.
Classical physics normally includes the fields of mechanics, optics, electricity, magnetism, acoustics and thermodynamics. Modern physics is a term normally used to cover fields which rely on quantum theory, including quantum mechanics, atomic physics, nuclear physics, particle physics and condensed matter physics, as well as the more modern fields of general and special relativity. Although this distinction can be found in older writings, it is of little recent interest as quantum effects are now understood to be of importance even in fields previously considered classical.
Approaches in physics.
There are many approaches to studying physics, and many different kinds of activities in physics. There are two main types of activities in physics; the collection of data and the development of theories. 
The data in some subfields of physics is amenable to experiment. For example, condensed matter physics and nuclear physics benefit from the ability to perform experiments. Experimental physics focuses mainly on an empirical approach. Sometimes experiments are done to explore nature, and in other cases experiments are performed to produce data to compare with the predictions of theories. 
Some other fields in physics like astrophysics and geophysics are primarily observational sciences because most their data has to be collected passively instead of through experimentation. Nevertheless, observational programs in these fields uses many of the same tools and technology that are used in the experimental subfields of physics. 
Theoretical physics often uses quantitative approaches to develop the theories that attempt to explain the data. In this way, theoretical physics often relies heavily on tools from mathematics. Theoretical physics often can involve creating quantitative predictions of physical theories, and comparing these predictions quantitatively with data. Theoretical physics sometimes creates models of physical systems before data is available to test and validate these models. There are many significant uses of physics like measuring houses or any measure. Also, it can be used to measure falling objects like planes. 
These two main activities in physics, data collection and theory production and testing, draw on many different skills. This has led to a lot of specialization in physics, and the introduction, development and use of tools from other fields. For example, theoretical physicists apply mathematics and numerical analysis and statistics and probability and computer software in their work. Experimental physicists develop instruments and techniques for collecting data, drawing on engineering and computer technology and many other fields of technology. Often the tools from these other areas are not quite appropriate for the needs of physics, and need to be adapted or more advanced versions have to be produced.
Physicists.
There are many famous physicists. Isaac Newton studied gravity. Galileo Galilei studied light and how planets moved. Albert Einstein made a theory for how light can make electrons move, and studied how gravity affects light and space. James Clerk Maxwell proved that light is a type of electromagnetic wave.
Prominent theoretical physicists.
Famous "theoretical physicists" include

</doc>
<doc id="592" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=592" title="Politics">
Politics

Politics is the way that people living in groups make decisions. 
Politics is about making agreements between people so that they can live together in groups such as tribes, cities, or countries. In large groups, such as countries, some people may spend a lot of their time making such agreements. These people are called politicians. Politicians, and sometimes other people, may get together to form a government. The study of politics in universities is called political science, political studies, or public administration.
In everyday life, the term "politics" refers to the way that countries are governed, and to the ways that governments make rules and laws. But politics can also be seen in other groups, too, such as in big companies, schools and churches.
Governments.
The government tries to lead the whole group. Governments do things such as:
One of the ways the government leads the group is by making laws and rules which tell everybody what they can and can not do. The government makes these laws so that society will be safe and well-ordered. The law that "you must not drink alcohol while driving a car" stops people from drunk driving, which could kill people. The law "you must wear a helmet on a motorcycle" makes sure that people protect themselves.
The government can also control people and what happens in a country in other ways besides making laws.
Politics is often compared to ethics (ideas about right and wrong). Ethics is a more abstract study of right and wrong. Ethics is usually more concerned with principle than law or politics or diplomacy, so many people think ethics is not practical. But without some agreement on ethics, there is probably no way to even have a debate, laws or an election. There is always some agreement on ethics and personal conduct in a political system.
Political parties.
In most countries, people have formed political parties to put forward their ideas. There is usually some disagreement between people within a party, but they work together because they feel that they agree on enough things, and they will have more power if they join together. They agree to take the same position on many issues, and agree to support the same changes to law and the same leaders. An election is usually a competition between different parties.
History.
The Greek philosopher Aristotle wrote that humans are a political animal and that ethics and politics are closely linked.
Niccolo Machiavelli wrote that politics was firstly about having and keeping power. He said that without power, a leader could do nothing.
In 1651, Thomas Hobbes wrote "Leviathan", a book about politics. Hobbes wrote that people living in groups often give up some of their rights in exchange for some protections from a government.
In the 1800s, John Stuart Mill developed the "liberal" idea of politics. Mill said that democracy is the most important political development of the 1800s. He said that there should be more protection for individual rights against the government. Bernard Crick wrote a list of the political virtues, which were about best practices of politics itself.
International politics.
There are also disagreements between different countries. Attempts to solve the problem with meetings are called diplomacy. This is politics between nations instead of politics within nations. If the problems are not resolved by diplomatic meetings they can lead to war or terrorism.

</doc>
<doc id="595" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=595" title="Value (personal and cultural)">
Value (personal and cultural)

"principle" redirects here. For occupation, see Principal.
A value (or principle) usually means an abstract rule, one that can be seen to apply in many experiences, or can be applied by choice in a lot of situations. It can also mean a moral choice one makes often and consistently, for example, some Buddhists avoid eating meat as a matter of principle.
Many groups of people agree on lists of principles. They may also try to agree on the order in which they are to apply, that is, which principles should be violated before which other ones. They might also try to list best practices which reflect the principles in the right order, and provide more practical (less abstract) instruction.
 "This can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".</div >

</doc>
<doc id="597" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=597" title="Profanity">
Profanity

Profanity is the act of using swear words. The adjective is 'profane'. Profanities can also be called curse ("cuss") words, dirty words, bad words, foul language, obscenity, obscene language, or expletives. It can be called an oath, although this word also has a normal meaning of a "solemn promise". 
Religious profanity is called blasphemy. The verb is to blaspheme and the adjective is 'blasphemous'. Saying “God!” or “Jesus Christ!” as an expression of surprise or annoyance is considered by many people to be blasphemy, mostly because one of the Ten Commandments says not to use God's name "in vain" (without substance or without relevance). Swearing oaths can also be considered wrong by some who follow Jesus' teaching against swearing oaths in the Gospels (such as Matthew 5:34).
A profanity usually refers to religion, sex, or bodily functions. These are things that people feel very strongly about. In some languages, such as French, there is more profanity about religion than most other topics.
A profanity can be a word or gesture or some other form of behaviour.
Different words can be profanity to different people, and what words are thought of as profanity in English can change over time.
Whether a word is a profanity will always depend on the way people think. Some people will be offended by something, while others will not be. Words which should not be used are taboo words. Using such words is thought by some people to be a sin. For example, some Christians, some Muslims and many Mormons believe that swearing is a sin.
Opinions on profanity.
Some people call profanity "crude," but some say that it is no cruder to say "damn" or "crap" than it is to use "hate" (a word that simply creates a very strong emotion, but not a swear word). People who use profanity do not always mean to make anybody feel bad, and tolerance for different forms of profanity can vary widely, from person to person. Most often, using profanity is a verbal outlet for strong feelings (usually unpleasant ones), that might otherwise cause a physical reaction. At other times, some people may use profanity as humor.
Coprolalia.
Some people develop a mental condition where they use profanity constantly. This is called coprolalia. Many people think this is called Tourette syndrome. Tourette syndrome is actually a group of symptoms that only includes coprolalia 15% of the time. The condition can be [ aggravated] (made worse) by stress.
Examples of profanity.
Several of these words come from Anglo-Saxon or Norse names for body parts, and bodily functions. They came to be thought of as profanity mostly after the Normans brought French and Latin words for them to England. 
Profane gestures.
These are mostly performed while facing another person, and can be meant toward them, or about them. These gestures are considered as strong as profane words in most cases.

</doc>
<doc id="598" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=598" title="Proof">
Proof

Proof could mean: 
In entertainment:
 
 

</doc>
<doc id="600" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=600" title="People's Republic of China">
People's Republic of China

The People's Republic of China (PRC) (simplified Chinese: 中华人民共和国 
 
 
) is a one-party state in East Asia governed by the Communist Party of China. It was founded on 1 October 1949. It has over 1.3 billion people, which is more than any other country in the world. It covers an area of 9.6 million square kilometers. 
The capital city is Beijing, and Shanghai is the city with the most people living in it. The United Kingdom gave Hong Kong back to China in 1997 and Portugal gave Macao back to China in 1999. These two cities remain highly autonomous. The central government is responsible for defense and foreign affairs but not the daily operations for 50 years. PRC claims Taiwan as one of its many provinces. However, PRC does not have control of Taiwan which has an entirely different political system and officially known as the Republic of China (Taiwan).
History.
In 1912, the Qing dynasty was overthrown by the Kuomintang, a nationalist party, and the Republic of China established. Over time, Marxist ideas grew popular and the Communist party was formed. In 1927, the Chinese Civil War began as the Kuomintang, led by Chiang Kai-shek, and the Communists fought one another. By 1949, the Red Army of the Chinese Communist Party had gained control over mainland China and Mao Zedong announced the creation of the People's Republic of China. Chiang Kai-shek and the other nationalists fled to Taiwan.
As the leader of the People's Republic of China, Mao began many social and economic reform projects with mixed results. The Great Leap Forward, from 1958 to 1961, tried to industrialize China and increase its food production, but resulted in one of the largest famines in history. It is estimated that 45 million people died as a result of this reform project. In 1966, Mao began the Cultural Revolution to remove capitalist influences from society and government. Major government officials and ordinary citizens were accused of being "revisionists" - people who disagreed with some parts of Marxism - or "counter-revolutionaries" and were persecuted. Many universities and schools were closed, and historical and religious sites were destroyed. Although the program officially ended in 1969, it continued until Mao's death in 1976.
During this time period, the People's Republic of China did not get along with the capitalist countries of the Western world. Beginning in the 1960s, relationships between the People's Republic of China and the Soviet Union also became increasingly unfriendly in the Sino-Soviet Split. In 1972, to counter the power of the Soviet Union, Mao and Zhou Enlai met with US President Richard Nixon in Beijing. This began to improve relationships between China and the Western world.
After Mao's death, there was a power struggle between the Gang of Four and Hua Guofeng, the man Mao had chosen to be the next leader of China. Eventually, Deng Xiaoping, one of the veterans of the revolution, took power. He began a "Reform and Opening Up" (simplified Chinese: 改革开放 
 
 
) campaign. These reforms tried to make the People's Republic of China a modern, industrial - but still socialist - nation by moving towards a market system. Deng's policies would be known as "socialism with Chinese characteristics."
Although Deng's policy helped loosen restrictions on citizens, the People's Republic of China continues to have problems with the amount of control the government has over citizens' private lives. In 1979, the one-child policy, which limits most couples to one child, was created because of the overpopulation problem in the People's Republic of China. This policy is highly controversial and many Westerners have criticized it. News and Internet sites are also censored by the government.
In 1989, the Chinese government used soldiers and tanks to stop a protest in Beijing's Tiananmen Square organized by students seeking political reform. This action received worldwide criticism and led to economic sanctions being placed on the Chinese government.
In August 2008, China hosted the Summer Olympics for the first time.
Geography.
The People's Republic of China is the third-largest country in the world by land area after Russia and Canada. China borders 14 nations. It borders Vietnam, Laos, and Burma in Southeast Asia; India, Bhutan, Nepal and Pakistan in South Asia; Afghanistan, Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan and Kazakhstan in Central Asia; a small section of Russian Altai and Mongolia in Inner Asia; and the Russian Far East and North Korea in Northeast Asia.
China has two major rivers, the Yellow River and the Yangtze River. There is also the Taklamakan and the Gobi Desert.
The world's highest point, Mt. Everest (8848m), is on the border. The country's lowest point, and the world's fourth-lowest, is the dried lake bed of Ayding Lake (−154m). 
Biodiversity.
China is one of 17 megadiverse countries. It is in two of the world's major ecozones: the Palearctic and the Indomalaya. In the Palearctic zone, mammals such as the horse, camel, tapir, and jerboa can be found. Among the species in the Indomalaya region are the Leopard Cat, bamboo rat, treeshrew, and various monkey and ape species. Some overlap is between the two regions; deer, antelope, bears, wolves, pigs, and many rodent species can all be found in China's environments. The famous giant panda is found only in a limited area along the Yangtze River. China has a continuing problem with trade in endangered species. There are now laws to stop such activities.
China also has a variety of forest types. Cold coniferous forests cover most of the north of the country. The forest have animal species such as moose and the Asian black bear, along with over 120 bird species. Moist conifer forests can have thickets of bamboo. It is replaced by rhododendrons in higher montane stands of juniper and yew. Subtropical forests, which are mostly in central and southern China. These support as many as 146,000 species of flora. Tropical and seasonal rainforests, though confined to Yunnan and Hainan Island, have a quarter of all the plant and animal species found in China.
Military.
The PRC Armed Forces is one of the most powerful Army in the world. Nowadays PRC is among the atomic powers in the world. It also has the largest army in the world.
People and culture.
There are 56 recognized minority ethnic minority groups in China. Han is the largest ethnic group in China (92% of the population). The Communist Party of China controls the government. Mandarin Chinese is the main spoken language.
Transport.
Trains are commonly used for moving from one place to another, mainly for long distances. Bullet trains are faster and more common in the cities. China has more high-speed trains than any other country in the world. Buses and air transport are also very common.

</doc>
<doc id="604" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=604" title="Psychoneuroimmunology">
Psychoneuroimmunology

Psychoneuroimmunology (PNI) is the study of the interaction between psychological processes and the nervous and immune systems of the human body. PNI takes an interdisciplinary approach.
The main interests of PNI are the interactions between the nervous and immune systems and the relationships between mental processes and health. 
History.
Interest in the relationship between psychiatric syndromes or symptoms and immune function has been a consistent theme since the beginning of modern medicine.
Claude Bernard, a French physiologist, founded the concept milieu interieur in the mid 1800s. In 1865, Bernard described the perturbation of this internal state “… there are protective functions of organic elements holding living materials in reserve and maintaining without interruption humidity, heat and other conditions indispensable to vital activity. Sickness and death are only a dislocation or perturbation of that mechanism." (Bernard, 1865) 
Walter Cannon, a professor of physiology at Harvard University coined the term homeostasis in his book "The Wisdom of the Body" in 1932. In his work with animals Cannon observed that any change of emotional state in the beast, such as anxiety, distress, or rage was accompanied by total cessation of movements of the stomach (Bodily Changes in Pain, Hunger, Fear and Rage, 1915). These studies into the relationship between the effects of emotions and perceptions on the autonomic nervous system, the responses that led to the freeze, fight or flight response. 
Birth of psychoneuroimmunology.
In 1975 Robert Ader and Nicholas Cohen advanced PNI with a demonstration of classic conditioning of the immune function, and coined the term "psychoneuroimmunology". Ader was investigating how long conditioned responses might last in laboratory rats. The highly reproducible results showed that conditioned rats exposed to the conditioned stimulus were immuno suppressed. In other words, a signal via the nervous system (taste) was affecting immune function. This was one of the first scientific experiments that demonstrated that the nervous system can affect the immune system.
In 1981 David Felten, then working at the Indiana University of Medicine, discovered a network of nerves leading to blood vessels as well as cells of the immune system. The researchers also found nerves in the thymus and spleen terminating near clusters of lymphocytes, macrophages and mast cells, all of which help control immune function. This discovery provided one of the first indications of how neuro-immune interaction occurs.
Ader, Cohen and Felten went on to edit the groundbreaking book "Psychoneuroimmunology" in 1981, which laid out the underlying premise that the brain and immune system represent a single, integrated system of defense.
Link between stress and disease.
Stressors can produce profound health consequences. In one epidemiological study, for example, all-cause mortality increased in the month following a severe stressor – the death of a spouse. Theorists propose that stressful events trigger cognitive and affective responses which, in turn, induce sympathetic nervous system and endocrine changes. These ultimately impair immune function. Potential health consequences are broad, but include rates of infection, HIV progression, and cancer incidence and progression.

</doc>
<doc id="606" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=606" title="Political party">
Political party

A political party is an organized group of voters. It often puts forward candidates for public office. In a democracy, leaders must "run for office" in an election. In a dictatorship, there is generally only one party allowed, that can approve a new leader without non-members having a choice. 
About.
A political party is similar to a faction, and can be the same thing. In some systems, members of one party in the legislature are all expected to vote the same way. The laws written by the party or faction with the majority of votes become adopted by the country, so this means whatever party is elected to over half the seats, gets to run the government. The next largest party is often called the "opposition". Sometimes when there are more than two parties with seats, no one party has over half of the seats. Then two or more parties might join together to form what is called a "coalition".
Some parties are formed around a single issue or interest group. Others form policies to address all matters of government, known as a "platform".
Many political parties have a set of ideas and beliefs (called its "ideology"). People often describe these ideologies using words such as "rightwing" and "leftwing". 
Common ideologies include environmentalism, socialism (ranging from social democracy to Marxism and Communism), conservatism, democracy, liberalism, and nationalism.
The law.
Political parties can be against the law in some places. When some parties get a lot of power, they can make all other political parties illegal. For example, the Nazi Party did this in Germany, and the Communist Party did it in several countries. Some countries make extreme-right parties illegal (such as Vlaams Blok in Belgium). At other times, countries have outlawed far-left parties. For example, West Germany banned the Communist Party in 1956.
A handful of countries like China, North Korea and Cuba still have one-party dictatorships. In a few other dictatorships, such as Saudi Arabia, all political parties are banned and there is no parliament at all.
Importance in all big democracies.
In all big democratic countries, parties are very important. But there are a few very small countries, such as the island of Jersey, where most politicians do not belong to any party and where parties do not matter much.
In some democracies, there are only two big political parties. For example, in the United States, there is the Democratic Party and the Republican Party. Some other parties exist but are very small and do not hold seats in Congress.
In other countries there are larger numbers of parties. In the German federal Parliament (or Bundestag), six parties have seats. In the United Kingdom, there are two big parties, one medium-sized party, and many small ones.

</doc>
<doc id="607" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=607" title="Page">
Page

A page can be different things:
 
 

</doc>
<doc id="608" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=608" title="Pet">
Pet

A pet is a domesticated animal that lives with people, but is not forced to work and is not eaten, in most instances. In most cases, a pet is kept to entertain people or for companionship. Some pets such as dogs and cats are placed in an animal shelter if there is no one willing to take care of it. If no one adopts it or the pet is too old/sick, the pet may be killed.
Dogs, cats, fish, birds are the most common pets in North America. Horses, elephants, oxen, and donkeys are usually made to work, so they are not usually called pets. Some dogs also do work for people, and it was once common for some birds (like falcons and carrier pigeons) to work for humans.
Rodents are also very popular pets. The most common are guinea pigs, rabbits, hamsters (especially Syrian and dwarf hamsters), mice and rats.
The cap'tchi tribe in Sudan is known for the ritual burning of domesticated animals that are considered too sacred to eat.
 "This can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".</div >

</doc>
<doc id="609" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=609" title="Product">
Product

A product can mean a few things:
 
 

</doc>
<doc id="620" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=620" title="Program">
Program

The term Program can be used in many ways.
 
 

</doc>
<doc id="623" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=623" title="Platonic realism">
Platonic realism

Platonic realism is the theory of reality developed by Plato, and explained in his theory of Forms. Platonic realism states that the visible world of particular things is a shifting exhibition, like shadows cast on a wall by the activities of their corresponding universal Ideas or Forms. Whereas the visible world of particulars is unreal, the Forms occupy the unobservable yet true reality and are real.
Platonism is a similar, yet sometimes modified, view of reality.
Origin.
Among the natural philosophers in ancient Greece, the problem of universals was the mystery of where particular things derive their traits that we perceive as universals—for instance "red" or "apple" or "good" or "woman" or "truth".
Plato explained that the particular things of the visible world are imperfect, transient copies of the universal Ideas that are the perfect, lasting Forms. Existing exist outside space and time, the Forms are the universals and act as templates from which particulars manifest.
In his "Metaphysics", Aristotle, a student of Plato, explained that Socrates and his own student Plato held it significant that the world is in flux, much as Heraclitus had commented, "You cannot step into the same river twice", a theme of the Eleatics, a group of pre-socratic philosophers.
Influence.
Plato's quest.
Plato considered that only the mind could access the timeless reality of truths, the realm of the Forms casting the visible world. Plato's metaphorical allegory of the cave—whereby humans only know reality as shadows of the real things they see interacting on a wall—suggests the practical consequences of Platonic realism as to "natural philosophy" in its endeavor to explain the natural world and as to values in human society. (Value theory comprises ethics, aesthetics, and political philosophy.)
Plato had led the focused application of geometry, developed by Euclid, to explain the natural world. Yet by his view of nature, Plato regarded astronomy as similar to seeking a theoretical proof in geometry—abstract and not the real world—whereupon the mind's insights derived from a quest to hold other truths through the mind's probing of ethics and aesthetics would yield discovery of truths within the realm of Forms, outside space and time.
Aristotle's answer.
Aristotle, a student of Plato, answered the problem of universals differently. Aristotle explained that universals are concepts corresponding to traits borne and shared by the particular things themselves. Aristotle did not regard all reality as visible, as he recognized existence of souls, yet regarded souls as unobserved parts of the visible world, real in itself. Aristotelian realism largely shaped the course of Western thought.
Aristotle developed a more or less full description and explanation of the natural world and developed logic—syllogistic logic—to derive conclusions of the relations among things. Aristotle's grounding in the visible world was a metaphysical approach that suggested what evolved by some 2 000 years later into empirical science.
Platonism.
Some mathematicians and physicists are Platonists, for instance Max Tegmark and Roger Penrose. Yet today's Platonists usually view entities within the visible world as real, and simply regard universal abstractions like numbers, sets, propositions, and geometry as corresponding to real and timeless entities that also exist, though "pure" Platonists regard only the Forms or their realm as real.
By way of string theory and the holographic principle, some physicists conjecture that Plato's allegory of the cave approximates the natural world's structure. Tegmark, who regards only the mathematical structure of the universe as real, has been called a "radical" Platonist.

</doc>
<doc id="625" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=625" title="Paradox">
Paradox

A paradox is a sentence in logic that cannot be true but also cannot be false. Many famous problems of this kind exist.
One of most famous paradoxes is called the liar's paradox. It is the simple sentence "This sentence is a lie."
If the sentence is true, then it is a lie, as it says. But if it is a lie, how can it be true? A lie cannot also be the truth. So the sentence being true makes it a lie.
If the sentence is a lie, then it is not as it says, it is true. But that is just what the sentence says. So that makes it true. So the sentence being a lie makes it true.
This paradox is not just true in English but in any language powerful enough for a sentence to make a claim about itself. This is true of mathematics as well. Paradox can never be removed from any symbol system that makes claims about itself.
Another example is the statement that "there is no cabal". Only a cabal can know if there is no cabal, so this is either a guess, or, it is a cabal trying to pretend it does not exist.
Other famous examples:
A paradox can also arise in ethics. Taking power over others is often also required to protect them, but also, one of the things being protected is their ability to do as they please, which this power interferes with. There is another article on ethical dilemma which means "a paradox arising in ethics".
Because a paradox forces us to think "out of the box", about possibilities other than true or false in logic, right or wrong in morality, it is considered very important in education. People who do not see a paradox where others do, are likely to be too certain they are right.

</doc>
<doc id="626" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=626" title="Potato">
Potato

A potato is a root vegetable, the "Solanum tuberosum". It is a small plant with large leaves. The part of the potato that people eat is a tuber that grows under the ground.
A potato contains a lot of starch and other carbohydrates. Potato usually has a brown or pink skin and is white or yellow inside. If the potato gets light on it, the tuber turns green and will be poisonous.
History.
The potato is originally from the high and cool areas of the Andes of Peru. It was grown as a food crop more than 7,000 years ago. When Spanish conquistadores came to South America in the 1500s they took potatos back to Europe. 
It took nearly 200 years for the potato to become a widely grown crop. In the 1780s the farmers in Ireland began growing potatoes because they grew well in the poor soils. They also have most of the vitamins that people need to survive. The Irish became so dependent on the potato that when the crop failed in 1845 there was a famine and many people starved to death.
The potato plant is now grown in many different parts of the world. Captain William Bligh planted potatoes on Bruny Island, Tasmania in 1792. In Australia they are now the largest vegetable crop.
Types.
Scientists in Germany have used genetic engineering to make a potato called the Amflora, which could be grown to make starch for making other things in factories.
Cooking.
The potato cannot be eaten unless it is cooked. People cook potatoes by boiling, baking, roasting, or frying them. French fries or "chips" are potatoes cut into long pieces and fried until they are soft. Potato chips, often called crisps, are potatoes cut into very thin round pieces and fried until they are hard. 
William Shakespeare wrote that the potato was an aphrodisiac, but there is no evidence to show this is true.

</doc>
<doc id="628" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=628" title="Plant">
Plant

Plants are one of the five big groups (kingdoms) of living things. They are autotrophic eukaryotes, which means they have complex cells, and make their own food. Usually they cannot move (not counting growth).
Plants include familiar types such as trees, herbs, bushes, grasses, vines, ferns, mosses, and green algae. The scientific study of plants known as botany, has identified about 350,000 extant (living) species of plants. Fungi and non-green algae are not classified as plants. 
Most plants grow in the ground, with the roots below and the stem above. Some float on water. Water and some nutrients come from the roots. Then climb the stem and reach the leaves. The evaporation of water from pores in the leaves pulls water through the plant. This is called transpiration. 
A plant needs sunlight, carbon dioxide, minerals and water to make food. A green substance in plants called chlorophyll traps the energy from the Sun needed to make food. Chlorophyll is mostly found in leaves, inside plastids, which are inside the leaf cells. The leaf can be thought of as a food factory. Leaves of plants vary in shape and size, but they are always the plant organ best suited to capture solar energy. Once the food is made in the leaf, it is transported to the other parts of the plant such as stems and roots.
The word "plant" can also mean to put something in the earth. For example, farmers plant seeds in the ground which later grows to become a plant!
Types of plants.
Green algae:
Land plants (embryophytes)
The plant food factory.
At least some plant cells contain photosynthetic organelles (plastids) which enable them to make food for themselves. With sunlight, water, and carbon dioxide, the plastids make sugars, the basic molecules needed by the plant. Free oxygen (O2) is produced as a by-product of photosynthesis. 
Later, in the cell cytoplasm, the sugars may be turned into amino acids for proteins, nucleotides for DNA and RNA, and carbohydrates such as starch. This process needs certain minerals: nitrogen, potassium, phosphorus, iron and magnesium.
Plant nutrients.
Plant nutrition is the study of the chemical elements that are necessary for plant growth. 
Macronutrients:
Micronutrients (trace elements) include:
Roots.
The roots of plants perform two main functions. First, they anchor the plant to the ground. Second, they absorb water and various nutrients dissolved in water from the soil. Plants use the water to make food. The water also provides the plant with support. Plants that lack water become very limp and their stems cannot support their leaves. Plants which specialise in desert areas are called xerophytes or phreatophytes, depending on the type of root growth (examples are a cactus).
Water is transported from the roots to the rest of the plant through special vessels in the plant. When the water reaches the leaves, some of it evaporates into the air. Many plants with the help of fungi to make their roots work properly. This plant/fungi symbiosis is called mycorrhiza. Rhizobia bacteria in root nodules help some plants get nitrogen.
Flowering plant reproduction.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : Flowering plant sexuality
Flowers and pollination.
Flowers are the reproductive organ only of "flowering" plants (Angiosperms). The petals of a flower are often brightly colored and scented to attract insects and other pollinators. The stamen is the male part of the plant. It is composed of the "filament" (a stalk) that holds the anther, which produces the pollen. Pollen is needed for plants to produce seeds. The carpel is the female part of the flower. The top part of the carpel contains the stigma. The style is the neck of the carpel. The ovary is the swollen area at the bottom of the carpel. The ovary produces the seeds. The sepal is a leaf that protects a flower as a bud.
The process by which pollen gets transferred from one flower to another flower is called pollination. This transfer can happen in different ways. Insects such as bees are attracted to bright, scented flowers. When bees go into the flower to gather nectar, the spiky pollen sticks to their back legs. The sticky stigma on another flower catches the pollen when the bee lands or flies nearby it. 
Some flowers use the wind to carry pollen. Their dangling stamens produce lots of pollen that is light enough to be carried by the wind. Their flowers are usually small and not highly coloured. The stigmas of these flowers are feathery and hang outside the flower to catch the pollen as it falls.
Seed travellers.
A plant produces many spores or seeds. Lower plants such as moss and ferns produce spores. The seed plants are the Gymnosperms and Angiosperms. If all the seeds fell to the ground besides the plant, the area might become overcrowded. There might not be enough water and minerals for all the seeds. Seeds usually have some way to get to new places. Some seeds can be dispersed by the wind or by water. Seeds inside juicy fruits are dispersed after being eaten. Sometimes, seeds stick to animals and are dispersed that way.
Fossils.
The question of the earliest plant fossils depends on what is meant by the word "plant". 
By the Silurian, fossils of whole plants are preserved, including the lycophyte "Baragwanathia longifolia". From the Devonian, detailed fossils of rhyniophytes have been found. Early fossils of these ancient plants show the individual cells within the plant tissue. The Devonian period also saw the evolution of the first tree in the fossil record, "Wattezia". This fern-like tree had a trunk with fronds, and produced spores.
The Coal measures are a major source of Palaeozoic plant fossils, with many groups of plants in existence at this time. The spoil heaps of coal mines are the best places to collect; coal itself is the remains of fossilised plants, though structural detail of the plant fossils is rarely visible in coal. In the Fossil Forest at Victoria Park in Glasgow the stumps of "Lepidodendron" trees are found in their original growth positions.

</doc>
<doc id="630" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=630" title="Prediction">
Prediction

A prediction is a statement that someone makes about what they think is going to happen. It is often very helpful to know what is going to happen to help prepare for these future events. Predictions are based on the idea that two beginning positions that are like each other will have similar results. By watching something happen, it is possible to predict what will happen if something similar happens. Predictions are given by science or fortune tellers or horoscopes. 
The most common example of a prediction is the weather forecast. Studying how weather happens lets people predict what the weather will be by looking at what is currently happening. This is helpful because by knowing that it is going to rain, a person can wear the right clothes for it.
Nostradamus has made many predictions about the future.
 "This can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".</div >

</doc>
<doc id="631" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=631" title="Probability">
Probability

Probability is a part of mathematics. It has to do with chance, the study of things that might happen or might not happen. 
For example, using probability, you can show that if you throw a coin up in the air and let it land, half of the time it will land with one side facing up, and half the time with the other side facing up. Many coins have a picture of the face of a famous person on one side, and something else on the other side. Often people call the side with the face "heads", and the other side "tails".
The probability (p) of an event is always between zero (impossible) and one (certain).
If we roll a die (plural: dice), then the chance that it will land on 1 is 1/6 (This is because there are 6 numbers on a die). Also, the chance it will land on 2 is 1/6. This is because it can land on 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6. 
The chance of any number between 1 and 6 landing is 1. Every time we roll the die, it will always land on a number between 1 and 6.
Probability can be figured out using mathematics. For example if you roll six dice, the chance of you getting a number more than ten is not obvious, but can be figured out using math and science.
One of the most interesting things about chance is that to figure out the probability that two things will both happen you multiply their two probabilities together. For instance, suppose that you want to know the probability of rolling two dice and getting a certain combination (it could be two 6s or a 3 then a 5, just any two). The possibility of getting a 3 is one in six (⅙) and the possibility of getting a 5 is also one in six, so the chances of getting a 3 then a 5 is ⅙×⅙=⅟36. If that number is expressed as somewhere between 0 and 1, it equals 0.027...7, which is fairly low. The possibility of getting a 3, then a 5, and then a 2 would be ⅙×⅙×⅙=⅟216 or 0.00463, which is a much lower probability.

</doc>
<doc id="632" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=632" title="Probability experiment">
Probability experiment

A probability experiment is a situation where chance affects the outcome (the result of an experiment). If the experiment can only have two outcomes, it is named Bernoulli trial. A coin flip is a probability experiment because chance affects whether a coin will land heads or tails when it is flipped.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="636" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=636" title="Protein">
Protein

Proteins are long-chain molecules built from small units known as amino acids. They are joined together with peptide bonds. 
They are biochemical compounds consisting of one or more polypeptides folded into a round or fibrous shape.
A polypeptide is a single linear polymer chain of amino acids. The sequence of amino acids in a polypeptide comes from the DNA sequence of a gene. The genetic code specifies 20 standard amino acids. Shortly after synthesis, some amino acids are chemically modified. This alters the folding, stability, activity, and function of the protein. Sometimes proteins have non-peptide groups attached, as cofactors.
Proteins are essential to all cells. Like other biological macromolecules (polysaccharides and nucleic acids), proteins take part in virtually every process in cells: 
Proteins for humans.
Proteins do different things depending on their shape. They can be found in meat or muscle. They are used for growth and repair, as well as for strengthening the bones. They help to make tissue and cells. They are in animals, plants, fungi, bacteria, and also in the human body. 
Muscles contain a lot of protein. When protein is digested, it is broken down into its amino acids. These amino acids can then be used to build new protein. Proteins form an important part in foods like milk, eggs, meat, fish, beans, and nuts. There are four things that determine what a protein will do. The first is the order of the amino acids. There are 20 amino acids, and they are all a bit different. The second is the little twists in the chain. The third is how the entire thing is folded up. The fourth is whether it is made up of different sub-units. Haemoglobin molecules, for example, are made of four sub-units.
Essential amino acids.
Proteins are necessary in animals' diets, since animals cannot make all the amino acids they need (they can make most of them). They must get certain amino acids from food. These are called the "essential amino acids". Through digestion, animals break down ingested protein into free amino acids. The amino acids are then used in metabolism to make the enzymes and structures the body needs.
There are nine essential amino acids for humans, which must be got from food. Meat contains all the essential amino acids humans need; most plants do not. However, eating a mixture of plants, such as both wheat "and" peanut butter, or rice "and" beans, provides all the essential amino acids needed. Soy products like tofu provide all the essential amino acids as does quinoa but these are not the only way to get the protein you need.
The scientist Jöns Jacob Berzelius gave proteins their name, but many other scientists have studied proteins.

</doc>
<doc id="637" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=637" title="Periodic table">
Periodic table

The periodic table of the chemical elements is a list of known atoms. In the table, the elements are placed in the order of their atomic numbers starting with the lowest number. The atomic number of an element is the same as the number of electrons or protons in that particular atom.
In the periodic table the elements are arranged into "periods" and "groups". 
A row of elements across the table is called a "period". Each period has a number: from 1 to 7. Period 1 has only 2 elements in it: hydrogen and helium. Period 2 and Period 3 both have 8 elements. Other periods are longer.
A column of elements down the table is called a "group". There are 18 groups in the standard periodic table. Each group has a number: from 1 to 18. Elements in a group have electrons arranged in similar ways, which gives them similar chemical properties (they behave in similar ways). For example, group 18 is known as the noble gases because they are all gases and they do not combine with other atoms.
The periodic table can be used by chemists to observe patterns, and relationships between the elements. For example, elements to the bottom and far left of the table are the most metallic, and elements on the top right are the least metallic. (e.g. cesium is much more metallic than helium). There are also many other patterns and relationships.
There are two systems of group numbers; one using Arabic numerals (1,2,3) and the other two using Roman numerals (I, II, III). The Roman numeral names were used at first and are the traditional names; the Arabic numeral names are newer names that the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) decided to use as well. The IUPAC names were meant to replace the older Roman numeral systems as they used the same names to mean different things, which was confusing.
The Periodic Table was invented and arranged by the Russian chemist Dmitry Ivanovich Mendeleyev (1834-1907).
Standard periodic table.
Chemical Series of the Periodic Table
State at standard temperature and pressure
The colour of the number (atomic number) above the element symbol shows the state of the element at normal conditions.
Radioactivity
Other methods for displaying the chemical elements.
The version of the periodic table shown above is the one in widespread use. There the most widespread other versions are shown below:

</doc>
<doc id="638" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=638" title="Physiology">
Physiology

Physiology is the study of how living things work. Physiologists can study how organs of an organism work together to make things happen. In human beings, for example, the digestion of food hormones and other chemicals are made by the stomach, liver, and pancreas. Muscle contraction happens because of chemical messages made by nerves of that muscle. By learning how the body functions normally, physiologists and physicians can better understand what happens when organs do not function normally. For example, an understanding of how the thyroid gland functions has helped in treating goitre. Studies of the circulatory system and the nervous system have helped physicians understand and treat such illnesses like heart disease, stroke, and high blood pressure.
The field is usually divided into human physiology, animal physiology, and plant physiology.

</doc>
<doc id="639" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=639" title="Planet">
Planet

Image of the Solar System planets. Top image shows the Terrestrial planets and the bottom image shows the Gas giants.
<onlyinclude>A planet is a large object such as Jupiter or Earth that orbits a star. It is smaller than a star, and it does not make light. Planets are ball-shaped (spheres). Objects that orbit planets are called moons. Planets orbiting a star are called a star system. There are eight planets in our Solar System. Pluto used to be known as a planet, but in August 2006, the International Astronomical Union decided it was a dwarf planet instead. There are four more known dwarf planets in the Solar System, Ceres, Makemake, Eris and Haumea.
The name "planet" is from the Greek word πλανήτης ("planetes"), meaning "wanderers", or "things that move". Until the 1990s, people only knew of those in the Solar System. As of June 2011, we know of 563 other planets. All of these newly found planets are orbiting other stars: they are "extrasolar" planets. Sometimes people call them "exoplanets".</onlyinclude>
In the Solar System.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : History of astronomy
The planets in the Solar System have names of Greek or Roman gods, apart from Earth, because people did not think Earth was a planet in old times. However, Earth is occasionally referred by the name of a Roman god: "Terra". Other languages, for example Chinese, use different names. Moons also have names of gods and people from classical mythology, or from the plays written by Shakespeare. 
Planets.
Here is a list of planets in the Solar System. They are ordered by how close they are to the Sun, nearest first. 
Types of planets.
Astronomers speak about "major" (or true) planets, and minor planets, which are smaller objects that go around the Sun. Some examples of "minor planets" are asteroids, comets, and trans-Neptunian objects.
Planets in the Solar System are of three sorts:
Many objects in the Solar System that are not planets are also "icy". Examples are the icy moons of the outer planets of the Solar System (like Triton).

</doc>
<doc id="641" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=641" title="Political problems of China">
Political problems of China

The People's Republic of China claims that the island of Taiwan is part of its territory, but the Republic of China (which was the government that controlled all of China from 1911 to 1949) still claims the land as theirs, and does still control Taiwan.
Many people say the government stops people from having freedom of speech, freedom of religion and other political rights that people in western countries have. China still has one-party rule, and is not a democracy.
Territorial disputes.
The following territories are claimed by China (PRC and/or ROC) and by another country or more.
Lost territories (Unequal treaties).
Unequal treaties were forced onto Asian countries when European imperialism reached Asia. 
The list includes claims from PRC and ROC, as well as unofficial historical claims.
"Note: Japan's and Korea's unequal treaties have been resolved since the end of WWII."
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="642" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=642" title="Police">
Police

Police are a group of people whose job it is to enforce laws, help with emergencies, solve crimes and protect property. People who work for the police are called police officers or policemen. They work out of a police station. Police are trained in first aid and rescue, because police officers are often one of the first people to get to a place where people are sick or injured, such as a car accident, or a fire.
Powers.
The police have different powers to help them do their job. These powers are different in different countries. Most police officers have the power to arrest people, search people, and search houses/properties. They sometimes carry equipment such as guns, batons and pepper spray. The area where a police officer can use these powers is called their jurisdiction. If the officer goes outside of his jurisdiction, they are no longer allowed to use his powers. Another police force has to then take over.
Duties.
The police deal with;
Parts of police departments.
Most police departments have most of their officers in two main groups: a "patrol" group that has officers who wear uniforms, and a "detective" group that has officers who wear normal clothing. 
Not all countries use the same words to describe these groups. In the United Kingdom, for example, patrol officers form the "uniform branch", while detectives work within the CID ("Criminal Investigation Department"). Police uniforms, equipment and methods can change a lot depending on the country. In some areas, groups of police are train for special jobs such as dealing with riots or when a situation is very bad. 
Police in different countries.
Different countries have different names for their police. In Ireland, they are called the "Garda". In Russia, they were called the "Militsiyer" until 2012; now, they are called the "Politsiyer", closer to the English "police". Other names for police services are sheriff's office, marshal's office or department of public safety. In the same country there can be different types of police officer who have powers in different areas and situations, such as state police, military police and local police. Worldwide, police make up a small percentage of the people they serve. On average there are 303.3 police officers per 100,000 population. 
Equipment.
In most countries, police officers have been trained to carry guns. Even in countries like the United Kingdom, New Zealand and the Republic of Ireland where most police officers do not carry guns, more are being trained to do so because gun crime is getting worse. Firearms training teaches that the use of a firearm is only when lives are at risk. 

</doc>
<doc id="643" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=643" title="Pi">
Pi

This article is about Pi. For other uses, see Pi (disambiguation).
Pi or formula_1 is a mathematical constant, one of the first ever discovered. It is the ratio of the distance around a circle to the circle's diameter. This produces a number, and that number is always the same. However, the number is rather strange. The number starts 3.14159265... and continues without end. Such numbers are called irrational.
The diameter is the longest line which can be fitted inside a circle. It passes through the center of the circle. The distance around a circle is known as the circumference. Even though the diameter and circumference are different for different circles, the number pi remains constant: its value never changes. This is because the relationship between the circumference and diameter is always the same.
Approximation.
Pi is often written formally as formula_1 or the Greek letter π as a shortcut. Pi is also an irrational number, meaning it cannot be written as a fraction (formula_3), where 'a' and 'b' are integers (whole numbers). This basically means that the digits of pi that are to the right of the decimal go forever without repeating in a pattern, and that it is impossible to write the exact value of pi as a number. Pi can only be approximated, or measured to a value that is close enough for practical purposes.
A value close to pi is 3.141592653589793238462... A common fraction approximation of pi is formula_4, which yields approximately 3.14285714. This approximation is 0.04% away from the true value of pi. While this approximation is accepted for most of its use in real life, the fraction formula_5 is more accurate (giving about 3.14159292), and can be used when a value closer to pi is needed. Computers can be used to get better approximations of pi.
History.
Value of Pi was known to Ancient Indian mathematicians like Bhaskaracharya, and Aryabhatt.
Mathematicians have known about pi for thousands of years because they have been working with circles for the same amount of time. Civilizations as old as the Babylonians have been able to approximate pi to many digits, such as the fraction 25/8 and 256/81. Most historians believe that ancient Egyptians had no concept of π and that the correspondence is a coincidence.
The first written reference to it dates to 1900 BC. Around 1650 BC the Egyptian Ahmes gave a value in the "Rhind Papyrus". The Babylonians were able to find that the value of pi was slightly greater than 3 by simply making a big circle and then sticking a piece of rope onto the circumference and the diameter, taking note of their distances, and then dividing the circumference by the diameter.
Knowledge of the number pi passed back into Europe and into the hands of the Hebrews, who made the number important in a section of the Bible called the Old Testament. After this, the most common way of trying to find pi was to draw a shape of many sides inside any circle and use the area of the shape to find measure pi. The Greek philosopher Archimedes, for example, used a polygon shape that had 96 sides in order to find the value of pi, but the Chinese in 500 A.D. were able to use a polygon with 16,384 sides to find the value of pi. The Greeks, like Anaxagoras of Clazomenae, were also busy with finding out other properties of the circle, such as how to make squares of circles and squaring the number pi. Since then, many people have been trying to find out more and more exact values of pi.
In the 16th century, better and better ways of finding pi became available such as the complicated formula that the French lawyer François Viète developed. The first use of the Greek symbol "π" was in an essay written in 1706 by William Jones.
A mathematician named Lambert also showed in 1761 that the number pi was irrational; that is, it cannot be written as a fraction by normal standards. Another mathematician named Lindeman was also able to show in 1882 that pi was part of the group of numbers known as transcendentals, which are numbers that cannot be the solution to a polynomial equation.
Pi can also be used for figuring out many other things beside circles. The properties of pi have allowed it to be used in many other areas of math besides geometry, which studies shapes. Some of these areas are complex analysis, trigonometry, and series.
Pi in real life.
Today, there are different ways to calculate many digits of formula_1. This is of limited use though.
Pi can sometimes be used to work out the area or the circumference of any circle. To find the circumference of a circle, use the formula C (circumference) = π times diameter. To find the area of a circle, use the formula π (radius²). This formula is sometimes written as formula_7, where "r" is the variable for the radius of any circle and "A" is the variable for the area of that circle.
To calculate the circumference of a circle with an error of 1 mm:
People generally celebrate March 14 as Pi Day because March 14 is also written as 3/14, which represents the first three numbers 3.14 in the approximation of pi.

</doc>
<doc id="644" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=644" title="Proper noun">
Proper noun

A proper noun or proper name is a noun representing a unique thing (such as "London", "Jupiter", "John Hunter", or "Toyota"), as opposed to a common noun, which represents a class of things (for example, "city", "planet", "person" or "corporation"). Proper nouns are the only nouns in English which have the first letter capitalized. 
In English, proper nouns are not normally preceded by an article or other limiting modifier (such as "any" or "some"), and are used to denote a particular person, place, or object without regard to any descriptive meaning the word or phrase may have (for example, a town called "Newtown" may be, but does not necessarily have to be, a new [recently built] town).
Which nouns are considered proper names depends on language. For example, names of days and months are considered proper names in English, but not in Spanish, French, Swedish or Finnish, where they are not capitalized.
References.
 "This can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".</div >

</doc>
<doc id="646" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=646" title="Plastic">
Plastic

A plastic is a material that can change its shape, so many things can be made of plastic. There are many types of plastic. Some can be shaped only when they are freshly made; then they become hard afterwards. Others can be changed by heating them up or even by melting them. 
Most plastics are man-made; they do not occur in nature. They are often made from oil that comes out of the ground. The process of making plastics is usually quite complicated. Most of the materials that are called "plastic" are polymers. Polymers are long chains of atoms bonded to one another.
People experimented with plastics based on natural polymers for a very long time. Alexander Parkes, an English inventor (1813-1890), created the earliest form of plastic in 1855. It was hard but flexible and transparent, and he called it "Parkesine."
Plastic is filling up the landfills and sometimes if you burn it, it releases toxic fumes. If you do not recycle, it becomes waste.
Plastic Formulation.
Plastic comes from a liquid called petroleum, a type of oil. Scientists refine the petroleum which goes through a heating process. It develops ethylene and propylene as well, which are the chemical for building blocks of plastic. These chemicals are then combined with alternative chemicals that produces a polymer. 

</doc>
<doc id="647" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=647" title="Product stewardship">
Product stewardship

Product stewardship includes waste disposal measures in the distribution of an industrial product. That is, paying for the safe and proper disposal when you pay for the product, and relying on those who sold it to you, to dispose of it. 
The slightly more specific idea of product take-back means that the service of waste disposal is paid for at time of purchase. It is often applied to paint, tires, and other goods that become toxic waste if not disposed of properly. It is most familiar as the deposit bottle - where one pays for the loan of the bottle at the same time as one purchases what is inside it. The container deposit charged for a deposit bottle may be a fee to "buy" the bottle, separately from the fee to buy what it contains. If one returns the bottle, the fee is returned, and the supplier must return the bottle for re-use or recycling. If not, one has paid the fee, and presumably this can pay for landfill or litter control measures that dispose of say a broken bottle. Also, since the same fee can be collected by anyone finding and returning the bottle, it is common for people to collect these and return them as a means of surviving. This is quite common for instance among homeless people.
Legal requirements vary: the bottle itself may be considered simple property of the purchaser of the contents, or, the purchaser may have some obligation to return the bottle to some depot so it can be recycled or re-used. For the more toxic items, it is more likely that returning it is required:
This principle is applied very broadly beyond bottles to paint and automobile parts such as tires. When purchasing paint or tires in many places, one simultaneously pays for the disposal of the toxic waste they become. In some countries, such as Germany, law requires attention to the comprehensive outcome of the whole extraction, production, distribution, use and waste of a product, and holds those profiting from these legally responsible for any outcome along the way. This is also the trend in the UK and EU generally. In the United States, there have been many class action suits that are effectively product stewardship liability - holding companies responsible for things the product does, which it was never advertised to do.
Rather than let liability for these problems be taken up by the public sector or be haphazardly assigned one issue at a time to companies via lawsuits, many accounting reform efforts focus on achieving full cost accounting. This is the financial reflection of the comprehensive outcome - noting the gains and losses to all parties involved, not just those investing or purchasing. Such moves have made moral purchasing more attractive, as it avoids liability and future lawsuits.
So these are partial implementations of a strict service economy ideal.
Those who advocate these measures are concerned with the later phases of product lifecycle and the comprehensive outcome of the whole production process. It is considered a pre-requisite to a strict service economy interpretation of (fictional, national, legal) "commodity" and "product" relationships.

</doc>
<doc id="648" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=648" title="Peace">
Peace

Peace is a time without any fights or wars. In a larger sense, peace (or peacefulness) can mean a state of harmony, quiet or calm that is not disturbed by anything at all, like a still pond with no dogs
Peace within and among states is a goal of many people and organizations. One organization that was set up to bring peace among the nations and try to make war a thing of the past was the League of Nations after World War I. When it failed to stop World War II, it was replaced by the United Nations which tries to make the world peaceful. This means that if any member is attacked or invaded by another country without attacking that country first, the other members will come to help the country that was attacked first. This idea was used by the United Nations to defend both South Korea and Kuwait when they were attacked.
Martin Luther King Jr. wrote in a that, "True peace is not merely the absence of tension: it is the presence of justice." In other words, Real peace is more than just problems being gone: there must be fairness to have peace.
Alfred Nobel created an annual award, the Nobel Peace Prize, for the person who had done the most to bring peace to the world.
Religious beliefs and peace.
Buddhists think that peace can be gotten once all suffering ends.To get rid of suffering and get this peace, many try to follow a set of teachings called the Four Noble Truths
Jews and Christians believe that true peace comes from a personal relationship with God. Jesus Christ (also called the "Prince of Peace" in the Book of Isaiah) said: "Peace I leave with you; my peace I give you. I do not give to you as the world gives. Do not let your hearts be troubled and do not be afraid." ()
Inner peace.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : Inner peace
Inner peace (or peace of mind) refers to a state of being mentally and spiritually at peace, with enough knowledge and understanding to keep oneself strong in the face of stress. Being "at peace" is considered by many to be healthy and the opposite of being stressed or anxious. Peace of mind is generally associated with bliss and happiness.
Peace of mind, serenity, and calmness are descriptions of a disposition free from the effects of stress. In some cultures, inner peace is considered a state of consciousness or enlightenment that may be cultivated by various forms of training, such as prayer, meditation, Tai chi chuan or yoga, for example. Many spiritual practices refer to this peace as an experience of knowing oneself.
Movements and activism.
Peace movement.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : Peace movement
A movement that seeks to get ideals such as the ending of a particular war, minimize inter-human violence in a particular place or type of situation, often linked to the goal of achieving world peace. Means to achieve these ends usually include advocacy of pacifism, non-violent resistance, conscientious objector, diplomacy, boycotts, moral purchasing, supporting anti-war political candidates, demonstrations, and lobbying to create legislation on human rights or of international law.
Theories on peace.
Many different theories of "peace" exist in the world of peace studies, which involves the study of conflict transformation. The definition of "peace" can vary with religion, culture, or subject of study.
Peace is a state of balance and understanding in yourself and between others, where respect is gained by the acceptance of differences, tolerance persists, conflicts are resolved through dialog, people's rights are respected and their voices are heard, and everyone is at their highest point of serenity without social tension.

</doc>
<doc id="649" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=649" title="Quebec">
Quebec

Template codice_1 has been incorrectly substituted.
Quebec (spelled Québec in French) is a province in Eastern Canada. It is the biggest of Canada's ten provinces. It is the province with the second-highest number of people. Most of Quebec's inhabitants live along or close to the banks of the Saint Lawrence River. Not many people live in the north part of the province. 
Unlike the other provinces, most people in Quebec speak French. There is a strong French-language culture, which includes French-language newspapers, magazines, movies, television and radio shows.
The government of Quebec has its offices in the capital, Quebec City, one of the oldest cities in North America. The largest city in Quebec, and the second-largest city in Canada, is Montreal.
Quebec has many natural resources that are used to create jobs. Quebec also has many companies that create products for information and communication technologies, aerospace, biotechnology, and health industries. It has also developed close relations with the Northeastern United States.
Leaving Canada.
Quebec was part of New France until 1760, then under British control. Quebec became a province in the Canadian Confederation in 1867. Since then, some people in Quebec have wanted to leave Canada. Since Quebec is a mainly French-speaking province, most of the people there feel that it is very different from the rest of Canada, and want to keep it that way. Some feel that for this to happen, Quebec must leave Canada and become its own country. However, the people of Quebec are still divided as to its place in Canada. 
Quebec held democratic votes in 1980 and 1995 to decide whether to leave Canada. In 1995, the people of Quebec chose to stay in Canada by a 1% margin.
History of Quebec.
Aboriginal people and Inuit groups were the first peoples who lived in what is now Québec. These Aboriginal people lived by hunting, gathering, and fishing. Some of the Aboriginal people, called Iroquoians, planted squash and maize. The Inuit fished and hunted whales and seals for fur and food. Sometimes they warred with each other.
Vikings came in longboats from Scandinavia in 1000 AD. Basque whalers and fishermen traded furs with Aboriginal people throughout the 1500s.
The first French explorer to reach Quebec was Jacques Cartier. He sailed into the St. Lawrence River in 1534 and established a colony near present-day Quebec City.
Samuel de Champlain came from France and traveled into the St. Lawrence River. In 1608, he founded Quebec City as a permanent fur trading outpost. Champlain signed trading and military agreements with the Aboriginal people. Voyageurs, coureurs des bois, and Catholic missionaries used river canoes to explore the interior of the North American continent. 
After 1627, King Louis XIII of France made a rule that only Roman Catholics could go to live in New France. Jesuit clerics tried to convert New France's Aboriginal people to Catholicism. New France became a Royal Province of France in 1663. The population grew from about 3,000 to 60,000 people between 1666 and 1760. Colonists built farms on the banks of St. Lawrence River.
In 1753 France began building a series of forts in the British Ohio Country. Britain asked the French to remove the forts, and the French refused. By 1756, France and Britain were at war. In 1758, the British attacked New France by sea and captured the French fort at Louisbourg.
In 1759, British General James Wolfe defeated General Louis-Joseph de Montcalm outside Quebec City. France gave its North American land to Great Britain in 1763. In 1764, New France was renamed the Province of Quebec.
In 1774, the British Parliament passed the Quebec Act, giving recognition to French law, Catholic religion, and French language in the colony. The Quebec Act gave the Quebec people their first Charter of rights. The Quebec Act made American colonists angry, so they launched the American Revolution. A 1775 invasion by the American Continental Army was stopped at Quebec City. In 1783, Quebec gave the territory south of the Great Lakes to the new United States of America. In 1867 the Parliament of the United Kingdom passed the British North America Act, which brought most of the provinces together.
Quiet Revolution.
The conservative government of Maurice Duplessis dominated Quebec politics from 1944 to 1960 with the support of the Catholic Church. The Quiet Revolution was a period of social and political change. During the Quiet Revolution, English Canadians lost their control over the Quebec economy, the Roman Catholic Church became less important, and the Quebec government took over the hydro-electric companies.
In 1963, a terrorist group that became known as the Front de Libération du Québec (FLQ) began doing bombings, robberies and attacks on government offices. In 1970 the FLQ kidnapped James Cross, the British trade commissioner to Canada. The FLQ also kidnapped and assassinated Pierre Laporte, Minister of Labour and Deputy Premier of Québec. Laporte's body was found in the trunk of Paul Rose's car, on the South Shore of Montreal on October 17 1970. Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau invoked the War Measures Act, and 497 people were arrested.
The Quiet Revolution was so named because it was not marked by protests or violence.
In 1977, the newly elected Parti Québécois government of René Lévesque introduced the Charter of the French Language. Often known as Bill 101, it defined French as the only official language of Quebec. 
Government.
The government is based in the provincial capital, Quebec City. The government is led by a lieutenant-governor (pronounced "lef-") who represents the Crown. As of 2014, he is Pierre Duchesne. The political leader of the province is the premier. He is Philippe Couillard of the Quebec Liberal Party (PLQ), elected in 2014.

</doc>
<doc id="652" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=652" title="Reading">
Reading

Reading is a way of getting information from something that is written. Reading involves recognising the symbols that make up a language. Reading and hearing are the two most common ways to get information. Information gained from reading can include entertainment, especially when reading fiction or humor.
Reading by people is mostly done from paper. Stone, or chalk on a blackboard, or ink on a whiteboard can also be read. Computer displays can be read.
Reading can be something that someone does by themself or they can read aloud. This could be done to benefit other listeners. It could also be done to help concentrate.
"Proofreading" is a kind of reading that is done to find mistakes in a piece of writing.
Related pages.
 "This can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".</div >

</doc>
<doc id="653" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=653" title="Religion">
Religion

A religion is a set of beliefs that is held by a group of people. There are many different religions, each with a different set of beliefs. The beliefs are about the world and the people in it, about how they came into being, and what their purpose is. These beliefs are often linked to supernatural beings such as God, a number of gods or spirits. They may also be linked to an idea such as a path that the spirit of each person should take towards goodness, truth and duty. This is called spirituality. Each religion has different ideas about these things. Each religion also has a "moral code" which is a set of beliefs about how humans should act. Each religion usually has their own type of "devotions" when people worship or pray. They often have rituals (special things that are always done in the same way) for certain times of the year or certain times of a person's life. Other words that are used for religion are "faith" and "belief system". Altogether, followers of religion can be known as "religionists". Some people follow more than one religion at a time.
The largest religions are Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, Buddhism, Taoism, Sikhism and Judaism. There are many other religions. People who do not believe in any gods are called atheists. People who say that they are not sure whether they believe or not are called agnostics.
Religious beliefs.
God.
In many religions, one of the main beliefs is that there is a "deity" (or god) who is a great creator spirit. In many religions, there is just one deity that the people believe in. In other religions, there are many deities who each have different roles in the universe. In many religions, there are other types of spirits. These may include angels, devils and other such things which can be both good and bad.
Giving honour to God, the gods or the spirits is an important part of most religions. While this may often be done privately, it is also often done with gatherings of people and rituals. These rituals are often based on old traditions, and may have been done in almost the same way for hundreds, or even thousands of years.
Human spirit.
Another main belief is that humans have a "soul" or spirit which lives on after their body has died. The person's spirit is on a journey through life that continues after death. Most religions believe that what a person does during their lifetime will affect what happens to their spirit in the afterlife. Many religions teach that a good person's spirit can reach a special place of peace and happiness such as Heaven or Nirvana, and that a bad person's spirit can travel to a place of pain and suffering such as Hell. Still other religions believe in reincarnation - that instead of going either to Heaven or Hell, spirits of the dead return to earth in a new body.
Morality.
"Morals" are the way a human behaves to other humans. Most religions make rules about human morals. The rules of how people should act to each other are different in different religions.
For some religions, following a "path" of goodness, truth and duty is very important. This is called Tao in China. In the teachings of Judaism, people were told to "love your neighbour as yourself". In the teachings of Jesus, people were told to think of every single person as their "neighbour" and treat them with love.
Not every religion teaches people to be kind to all other people. In many religions, it has been common for people to believe that they have to act kindly only to some people and not to others. In some religions, people believed that they could please a god by killing or sacrificing another person.
Traditions.
Teaching.
A religion is passed on from one person to another through teachings and stories (which are often called "myths") which may be written down like the Bible, or told from memory like the Dreamtime stories of Australian Aboriginal people. In many religions, there are people who take the role of "priest" and spend their lives teaching others about the religion. There are also people who take the role of "pastor" and spend their life caring for other people. A person may be both a priest and a pastor. They are called by different names in different religions.
Symbols.
Symbols are used to remind people of their religious beliefs. They are also used or worn as a sign to other people that the person belongs to a particular religion. A symbol might be something that is drawn or written, it might be a piece of clothing or jewellery, it might be a sign that a person makes with their body, or it might be a building or monument or artwork. Picture symbols for different religions are shown in the box in the introduction to this article.
Witness and conversion.
In many religions, it is thought important that people should show other people that they are following a particular religion. This might be done in a general way by wearing a symbol or a type of clothing. Many people believe that it is important to tell other people about their religion, so that they can believe as well. This is called "witnessing". 
There are many ways to witness. A young person might simply say to their friends "I do not use drugs or get drunk because of my religion". This is a witness. A person may tell their classmates, workmates and friends about their beliefs. A person might go to other people's houses and talk about their beliefs, or invite the people to join in the rituals of the religion, such as going to church or to a religious festival. A person might have printed material such as books or leaflets that they give to other people to read. A person might travel to a different country to teach, to work in a health service or to help people in some other way. (People who do this are called "missionaries".) These are different ways that people witness to their religion.
When a person hears a witness and decides that they will join the religion, this is called a "conversion". Usually a person decides to join a religion because they like what they have read or been told, and they believe that they are hearing the truth. They join the religion because they choose. However, throughout history there have been many times when people have been forced to join a religion by violence and threats. This is still happening today.
In most countries of the world, people are free to belong to whatever religion they choose. This is generally thought of as a basic human right. However, there are parts of the world where it is illegal (against the law) to witness to any religion except the one accepted by the government of the country. People who belong to other religions may be threatened, put in jail or murdered.
Ritual.
Rituals are an important part of the tradition of many religions. In many religions, it is the tradition for people to meet for a celebration on one day in every week. There are also major celebrations that may be held only at certain times of the year, for example, on the birthday of a person who is honoured in that religion. Some religions have celebrations for different seasons of the year, or when the sun or moon is in a certain part of the sky.
In nearly every religion, the important stages of a person's life have a religious celebration. Birth, naming, reaching an age to think for oneself, reaching adulthood, marriage, childbirth, sickness and death are all celebrated by some religions. Having a celebration or special traditions when a person dies is very common.
It is the traditions that are about death that give the earliest evidence of religious beliefs. Scientists have discovered that 120,000 years ago, Neanderthal people started burying their dead. Early Homo sapiens put tools and other things into graves with the bodies, as if they could use them in the afterlife. From 40,000 years ago, many of the objects in graves are small artworks. Scientists believe that these objects were put there for religious reasons.
Groups and institutions.
An institution is one name for an organization. Many religions have organizations that manage the way that people who follow the religion are to act. The organization might employ religious leaders, educate people into the ideas of the religion, manage money, own buildings and make rules. Many religions have sub-groups which are called denominations. In Islam, for example, there is Ahmadiyya, Sunnism, Shi'ism and Sufism.
Buildings.
Most religions have special buildings where people meet. They are often called temples. In Judaism, they are called synagogues. In Christianity, they are called churches. In Islam, they are called mosques. People often try to make their religious building as beautiful as possible. Some religious buildings are great works of architecture.
Art and music.
People often make artworks that are about their religion, or that are used in religious celebration, or are put in a religious building. Religious art comes in all shapes and sizes, from tiny pieces of jewellery to huge statues and paintings. Artworks often give important clues to historians about different ancient religions that are not well understood.
Music is often important in religious celebrations. Singing, chanting and playing musical instruments are often part of regular religious gatherings of people. Special music is often used on special occasions. Many famous composers have written religious music. The words of songs that are 3,000 years old are used every day in Christian churches and Jewish synagogues.

</doc>
<doc id="655" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=655" title="Roman">
Roman

Roman or Romans may refer to: 
Literature.
 
 

</doc>
<doc id="657" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=657" title="Rudyard Kipling">
Rudyard Kipling

Template codice_1 has been incorrectly substituted.
<indicator name="top-icon"></indicator>Joseph Rudyard Kipling (30 December 1865 - 18 January 1936) was an English author and poet. He was born in Bombay, India. He wrote children's fiction, like "Kim", "The Jungle Book" and "Puck of Pooks Hill". He also wrote the well-known poems, "If —" and "Gunga Din", and many short stories set in India. He was awarded the 1907 Nobel Prize in Literature. 
Kipling died of a perforated duodenal ulcer in Fitzrovia, London in 1936 and is buried in Westminster Abbey, London.
 "This about a  or group of people can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="658" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=658" title="Recreation">
Recreation

Recreation or fun is a person's time of refreshing his or her body and mind.
There are many different forms of recreation which are shaped by individual interests and by environment; a few examples being reading, playing or listening to music, watching movies or TV, gardening, hunting, hobbies, sports, studies, and travel. Ooh, I want to have some fun...
Public places such as parks and beaches are very important for many recreational activities. Tourism profession has recognized long ago that many of their clients are specifically attracted by recreational offerings.

</doc>
<doc id="660" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=660" title="Red">
Red

Red is the color that is on the outside edge of the rainbow. It is one of the three primary colors, along with blue and yellow. Red light has a wavelength between 630-740 nanometers.
Red is the color of some apples and mostly, raspberries.
Red is the color of some blood and the occasional cherry. 
It is sometimes used to mark things that are wrong, important, or dangerous. 
Red is also commonly used as a warning to stop.
Meaning of red.
red also has the meaning of strong desire for love or to be in a relationship. 
Tones of red color comparison chart.
<ul>

</doc>
<doc id="661" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=661" title="Raw food">
Raw food

Foods are raw when they are not cooked. 
Most things are good to eat raw, but some can be poisonous. 
Health.
There's currently no solid evidence to suggest that raw food is more healthy than cooked food.
Germs.
Raw food can sometimes make people sick because of bacteria which would otherwise be destroyed by cooking.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="663" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=663" title="Ram">
Ram

Ram can mean:
 
 

</doc>
<doc id="664" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=664" title="Roman Empire">
Roman Empire

The Roman Empire (Latin: "imperium romanum") was the largest empire of the ancient world. Its capital was Rome, and its empire was based on the Mediterranean. The Empire dates from 27 BC, when Octavian became the Emperor, Augustus.
The empire was the third stage of Ancient Rome. Rome was first ruled by Roman kings, then by the Roman Republic, then by an emperor.
Many modern lands were once part of the Roman Empire, including Britain (not Scotland), Spain, Portugal, France, Italy, Greece, Turkey, Germany, Egypt, and the north coast of Africa. The main language of the Roman Empire was Latin; Greek was an important secondary language.
The western part of the Roman Empire continued for about 500 years, and the eastern part, including Greece and Turkey, continued for about a thousand years more. The eastern part was called the Byzantine Empire with a capital at Constantinople.
How the Roman Empire was run.
In order to control their large empire, the Romans developed important ideas about law and government. They developed the best army in the world at that time, and ruled by force. They had fine engineering, and built roads, cities, and outstanding buildings. The Empire was divided into provinces, each with a governor plus civil and military support. Letters, both official and private, would constantly go to and from Rome.
Trade was most important for Rome, a city of more than a million people, by far the largest city in the world. They needed, and got, wheat from Egypt, tin from Britannia, grapes from Gaul, and so on. In return, the Romans built provincial capitals into fine cities, protected them from raids by barbarians, and provided education and career opportunities for young people in the provinces, such as careers in the Roman army.
In principle, emperors had absolute control, and could do as they pleased. In practice, they faced many difficult problems. They had a staff of what we call 'civil servants' and the advice of the Roman Senate. The emperor had to decide what were the most important issues facing the Empire, and what should be done about them. Most of them tried to do two sorts of thing. One was to do things to improve the life of Romans in peacetime. The other was to fight and defeat Rome's enemies. A wealthy empire always has enemies.
With kings and emperors, a big problem is the order of succession. Who follows them when they die? Kings were sometimes followed by their eldest son, if he was capable of ruling. For Roman emperors, more often it would be an adopted son. It worked like this. The emperor would notice an outstanding young man from one of the best families. He would adopt him as his son. Before he died he would make clear whom he thought should succeed him, by making him a Roman consul, or by stating in his will that the younger man should succeed him. Sometimes this worked; sometimes it did not. Every now and then there would be a civil war between claimants to the throne.
An adopted son or two gave the emperor more choices. Some emperors had no son; some had sons who were killed in battle, or died during a plague. Later on, emperors grew so weak that the military would just pick one of their generals to be the next emperor. This often led to civil war. The life stories of the emperors can be found in List of Roman emperors.
The Romans fought many wars against other countries, and enjoyed watching violent sports. They enjoyed watching races between chariots pulled by horses, and fights between men using weapons (gladiators). Unlike in modern sports, the fighters were often killed in these fights. Romans enjoyed these shows in the Colosseum.
The Romans had great civil engineering. They built many large public buildings and villas, aqueducts to carry water, and good stone bridges and roads. Some of these things can still be seen today. Many famous writers were Romans, including Cicero and Virgil.
The New Testament of the Bible tells about the Romans in the life of Jesus Christ. During Jesus' life, the Romans, who were pagans, ruled his country. Later, several emperors tried to destroy Christianity but they did not succeed. By 312 AD the emperor Galerius allowed people freedom to follow Christianity, and the next year, a general, Constantine, became emperor and converted to Christianity.
The city of Rome was taken over several times by barbarians, notably in 410 AD when the Goths sacked the city (looting). The last Western Roman emperor, Romulus Augustus, resigned in 476 AD. The Roman Empire would last another 1,000 years as the Byzantine Empire in the east.
The main coin of the Roman Empire was the denarius.

</doc>
<doc id="666" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=666" title="Regime">
Regime

A regime is the leader and other people who run a government of a sovereign state.
There are many kinds of regimes. They can achieve power in many ways. Depending on the time and place and local civics like the electoral system, they can lose power in many ways too. The most common way for a regime to lose power was a coup, invasion or revolution until the 20th century. After that it became very dangerous and difficult to use these methods. Peaceful regime change is usually by an election - this method is now used by more than half the people on the Earth. It is called representative democracy. Such regimes are often called administrations to make it clear they are not dictators, and since the executive branch does not have all the power itself - it may share it with a legislative branch. Also the judicial branch is separate. The courts are not usually considered part of the regime.
However, some things are the same no matter how the regime achieved power:
When many regimes negotiate at the United Nations or World Trade Organization, it does not matter at all how each regime got its power. It matters only that they can agree and make everyone in their country do as the agreement says.
When someone wants a regime to change in another country, they usually are not able to do this by any means other than violence or interfering in its election. This is common if a regime is threatened by another regime.

</doc>
<doc id="673" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=673" title="River">
River

A river is a stream of water that flows through a "channel" (or passage) in the surface of the ground. The passage where the river flows is called the riverbed and the earth on each side is called a riverbank. A river begins on high ground or in hills or mountains and flows down from the high ground to the lower ground, because of gravity. A river begins as a small stream and gets bigger, the farther that it flows. 
The water in a river is called "fresh water". It comes from rain or snow and it can usually be drunk safely, unless it has been polluted. The water in a sea cannot be drunk safely because it is "salt water". Both people and animals often live near rivers. They need water to survive and, for humans, rivers were once the only means of fast transport.
About rivers.
The beginning of a river.
The start of a river is called its "source". The part of the river that is near the "source" is called a "young" or "youthful river". A young river is often in a V-shaped river bed, and flows quickly downhill over stones, and around big rocks. Young rivers often have lots of small waterfalls and rapids. 
The middle part of a river.
The middle part of a river is called a "mature river". A mature river makes a riverbed that is U-shaped. It might be very deep and run fast. It sweeps over small rocks and boulders, and makes big turns around hills and mountains. It is much wider than a "young river", but not as wide as an "old river". To cross over a mature river, people use bridges. Many cities and towns are built on the banks of mature rivers. Many farms that keep animals such as dairy cows, horses and sheep are along mature rivers because the animals can drink from the river every day. 
The last part of a river.
A river usually ends by flowing into an ocean, a lake or a bigger river. The place where the river flows out into a bigger body of water is called the "mouth" of the river. 
As a river flows towards its mouth, the countryside around the river often changes from hilly to flat. As it flows over the flat land the river becomes wider and slower. A wide slow river is called an "old river". An "old river" often floods across the land after there is lots of rain at the "headwaters". An "old river" slowly builds up its banks on either side; the high banks are called "levees". An old river often "meanders" (twists and turns), and sometimes, after a flood, it leaves lakes behind which are called "ox-bows" or "billabongs". Old rivers are the most useful type of river for growing crops. Corn, rice, fruit, cotton, hay, tobacco and sugar are some of the crops that are grown near old rivers. 
The shape of the mouth depends on the conditions of the sea where it flows. If there is a strong tide where the river meets the sea, the river forms an estuary. An estuary is a wide, funnel-like mouth of the river. The fresh water of the river mixes slowly with the salt water, becoming brackish water – a "break" between fresh and salty water. Many kinds of fish, clams, mollusks and other sealife live at estuaries. Many of the world's largest cities and harbours are at estuaries.
Where a river flows out to the sea, it sometimes flows very slowly through sandy or muddy land, making lots of little islands as it flows. The main stream of the river gets broken into many parts that spread out into a triangle shape like the Greek letter "Delta". When this happens, it is called the "delta" of the river. Deltas are often places that are not good for towns or farms but are very good for birds and other wildlife and fishing. Deltas are often made into wildlife reserves. Not all rivers have deltas. There are famous deltas on the Nile River, the Amazon River, the Mekong River, the Mississippi River and the Danube River. 
Underground rivers.
Some rivers flow underground through caves. Underground rivers form in places where there are lots of cracks in the rocks above, so that in rainy weather, the water runs downs and collects in small underground streams. Sometimes the underground water trickles or gushes out of the ground to form a small "spring" of water. In other places, where there are caves, the small underground streams run together to form a river. The river can sometimes run through deep wide underground caverns. While many underground rivers flow gently, some underground rivers flow fast and have rapids, particularly after heavy rain. Many underground rivers flow out through a cave mouth to become an ordinary river.
Using rivers.
The water in rivers is "fresh water" that has come from rain, snow and from underground streams. It can usually be drunk safely by people unless it is too dirty because of mud or human pollution. People and animals need fresh water to drink, so they often live by the side of a river. 

</doc>
<doc id="676" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=676" title="Right angle">
Right angle

A right angle is an angle with a measurement of 90 degrees. When two lines cross each other so that all the angles have the same size, the result is four right angles. The top of the letter T is at right angles to the vertical line. Walls of buildings are usually at right angles to the floor. Two things that are at right angles are called "perpendicular" or "orthogonal".
Planes (flat surfaces) can also meet at right angles. In a building, a wall and a floor are said to be perpendicular to each other, and they have a right angle.
Related pages.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="677" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=677" title="Reward">
Reward

A reward is getting something good for doing a given task. It needs someone who has the power to give the good thing. It is the opposite of punishment.
Ideas like risk and reward, reward and punishment are based on the idea that people do things, or avoid doing things, to get rewards. In psychology there is another idea that this is not true. This other idea says that training (conditioning) and emotions (affective factors) are much more important than the rewards or punishments given by others.
In trying to catch criminals and other bad people, the government often offers money to people. This money is given to people who may capture the criminal, or give information that helps the police catch them. For example after the Eureka Stockade rebellion in Ballarat, Victoria in 1854, the government offered a big reward of 400 pounds for the capture of the people who had started it.
In 2001, the US government offered a big reward of 2.5 million dollars for help in capturing the person who had sent anthrax in letters to a newspaper journalist and 2 senators. Anthrax is a disease which can kill people.
References.
 "This can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".</div >

</doc>
<doc id="679" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=679" title="Ranch">
Ranch

A ranch is a large farm where animals such as cows, horses or sheep are raised. The word "ranch" is from the Spanish word "rancho". It is used in American and Canadian English.
A ranch is often on private land. Ranches are often found in the desert areas of the western United States because there is plenty of available space. There are also many in Australia, where they are called stations.
There are lots of positives and negatives to cattle ranching including food and equipment for the locals.
 "This can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".</div >

</doc>
<doc id="680" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=680" title="Sport utility vehicle">
Sport utility vehicle

A sport utility vehicle (SUV) is a type of vehicle. It is built to be a rugged vehicle that combines cargo and passenger carrying capacity. Originally SUVs were not designed to be fuel efficient but modern designs are getting much better fuel mileage. In 2014 US sales of SUVs were over five million vehicles.
Appearance.
The typical SUV is a two-box design. Unlike a pickup truck that has an open cargo box the SUV has an enclosed cargo/passenger compartment. It has upright seating for five to seven passengers. It has an open interior with no trunk. It is often built on a pickup truck chassis for towing capacity, and usually has four wheel drive. Only about 15% of SUV owners ever go off road. According to Jeep Wrangler brand manager Kevin Metz, 60% of Jeep Wrangler owners go off road while around 80% of Rubicon owners do.
A similar class of vehicle is the crossover (CUV), but it is built on a car chassis. Often it uses a Unibody chassis instead of the heavier body-on-frame design of SUVs. Crossover vehicles often have all-wheel-drive instead of four-wheel drive. Crossovers are usually lighter than SUVs and get better fuel mileage. In general, when referring to an SUV, many include crossovers. However it is incorrect to refer to an SUV on a truck frame as a crossover.
History.
SUVs come from designs that were originally military. SUVs are descended from the World War II 1/4 ton reconnaissance vehicle, better known as the Jeep. The first Jeep was built by the American Bantam Car Company. Because Bantam was too small to manufacture all the vehicles needed for the army, Willys-Overland and Ford were given the army contracts. The Willys vehicle was designated Willys MB while the Ford vehicles were called Ford GPW. There was very little difference between the two and both were made from 1941 to 1945. They were the most widely produced military vehicle during World War II. American soldiers loved their Jeeps and many wanted to buy one when they returned home. Willys began producing a civilian model called the Jeep CJ immediately after the war. These were built from 1946 to 1986.
In 1948 British Rover Car Company (Land Rover) built its first vehicle for rural terrain based on a war surplus Jeep frame. It had an all-aluminum body and could be repaired in the field. British police forces, the military and other services found them ideal for off-road and as estate vehicles. In 1970 the Range Rover line was launched and became the luxury SUV vehicles they are today.
In the 1960s Ford introduced the Ford Bronco. International Harvester Company introduced the International Harvester Scout and Chevrolet brought out the K5 Blazer. Pickup trucks and SUVs combined only sold about 20% of all vehicles in the US in 1965. The rising gas prices and dependence on foreign oil triggered Congress to pass the first Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards in 1975. The law required car manufacturers to double fuel economy in the next ten years. But light trucks (including SUVs) were given lower standards by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA).
The 1980s saw smaller lighter SUVs such as the Chevrolet S-10 Blazer, the Jeep Cherokee (XJ) and the Ford Bronco II. They were compact SUVs powered by smaller, more fuel efficient engines. The SUVs of the 1980s attracted a different kind of buyer. They wanted to be seen as a rugged, masculine, outdoors-type. But less than 10 percent of users during this period actually drove off road. By the mid-1980s concerns were rising over SUV safety. The CBS News program 60 Minutes showed footage of a Jeep CJ rolling over. Other tests showed the Ford Bronco II could tip onto two wheels in turns as slow as 20 mph.
Safety concerns continued through the 1990s. In May 2000, the (NHTSA) contacted Ford and Firestone. There was a high incidence of tire failure on Ford Explorers, Mercury Mountaineers, and Mazda Navajos fitted with Firestone tires. There were Accidents involving Firestone-equipped Explorers resulting in at least 174 deaths and more than 700 injuries. Ford blamed Firestone and Firestone blamed Ford. In the end, Firestone's reputation suffered more than Ford's. 
But by 2005 gas prices had risen to $3 per gallon. It was gas prices and not safety that caused the manufacturers to make significant changes. The first CUV or crossover vehicle, the Toyota RAV4 had been sold in the US since 1996. But with higher gas prices CUVs became more popular. They were smaller, lighter and could share engines and chassis designs with existing models. The Lexus RX and the BMW X5 followed along with other models. In 2006 Ford changed to a unibody CUV chassis for its Ford Explorer vehicle. By then CUV sales made up half of the overall SUV market. By 2012 CUV sales were higher than SUV sales. While CUVs are not designed for off road use like an SUV, they are still very popular. Where the stereotypical Soccer mom started out driving a minivan she was now associated with the CUV.
Off-roading sports.
There are many forms of off-roading which are centered around SUVs. 
Popularity.
There are many reasons why SUVs have become popular. One reason is the comfort of their large cabins. Many models can carry almost as much as a minivan. Another reason is the driver still sits higher than other cars and SUVs with truck frames can be among the heavier vehicles on the highway. Their size gives them an image of safety. Men aren't the only targets of SUV and CUV ads. For example, some ads for the Subaru Forester are deliberately aimed at women buyers. Roughly 35 to 40 percent of SUV buyers are women. Ads commonly show SUVs driving across boulders or perched on a mountain peak. Advertisers know that one important reason many people buy SUVs is image.
Other names.
In Australia and Europe SUVs are usually called 4 wheel drives (4X4) or 4WDs.

</doc>
<doc id="682" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=682" title="Substance">
Substance

Substance ["sub'-stuns"] is the material, or "matter", of which something is made. Substances are physical things that can be seen, touched, or measured. They are made up of one or more elemental parts. Iron, aluminium, water and air are examples of substances.
Problems of definition.
The main problem of a clear definition of what the substance is that if, for example, to consider not just the universe (cosmos), being and non-being, and in general all, the question arises, what is the constant basic principle (attribute) is the basis of the substance, which generally consists of all (that is, matter, mind, senses, space, soul, and so on).
History of the concept.
The Latin word substantia - a translation of the Greek word for the essence (ousia), and in Latin to describe the essence of using the word essentia. In ancient philosophy substance is treated as a substrate, the first principle of all things (for example, "water" of Thales, the "fire" of Heraclitus). 
In modern times, the concept of substance is treated and spread widely. The first view is connected with an ontological understanding of substance as ultimate bases being (Francis Bacon, Benedict Spinoza, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz). Central category of metaphysics in philosophy substance is identified as with God and with nature and determined as the cause of itself (Latin causa sui). The main characteristics (attributes) of a substance from Benedict Spinoza are thinking and stretch. By analogy with the philosophy of Benedict Spinoza substance considered in the light of the concept of René Descartes and Leibniz. The first substance is a unity of subject and object, and the second - the same atoms are simple beings who lose their stretch, but receive attribute aspirations (Fr. appetition) and multiplicity. Thanks Leibniz substance begins to associate with matter.
The second point of view on the substance - an epistemological understanding of the concept, its capabilities and the need for scientific knowledge (John Locke, David Hume). Immanuel Kant believed that the law under which any change in the substance of events and the number of stored it in nature remains the same, can be attributed to the "analogies of experience." Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel defined substance as the integrity of changing, transient side of things, as a "major step in the development of the will." For Arthur Schopenhauer substance - matter for David Hume - a fiction, the coexistence properties. 

</doc>
<doc id="683" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=683" title="Symbol">
Symbol

A symbol is a drawing, shape, or object that represents an idea, object, or amount of something. 
The most common symbols are letters, which are symbols of words and sounds. A symbol can be an actual object (such as the cross, a symbol of Christianity or a scepter, a symbol of royalty and power), or a certain color or pattern. Symbols are used often in poetry and other types of literature, most often used as metaphors or similes.
A national emblem is a symbol for a certain country.
List of common symbols.
There are thousands of symbols that are recognized by most people all over the world, and many more that are limited to certain regions, religions, sciences, etc.. Some of the best known ones are listed below.

</doc>
<doc id="684" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=684" title="September">
September

September is the ninth month of the year in the Gregorian calendar, coming between August and October. It has 30 days. Its name comes from the Latin word "sept" for "seven" (it was the seventh month of the year, before January and February were added to the beginning of the year.)
The Month.
September begins on the same day of week as December every year, as each day in September and its equivalent in December are 91 days (13 weeks) apart. In no year does any other month end on the same day of the week as September, though in common years, it ends on the same day of the week as December of the previous year. September starts and ens on the same day of the week as June of the following year, if that year is not a leap year. If the following year is a leap year, then September starts on the same day of the week as March and November of that particular year (September 2011 started on the same day of the week as March and November 2012, as an example).
In the old Roman calendar, September was the seventh month, which is where it got its name ("Septem" means "seventh"). The ninth month at the time was November ("Novem" means "ninth"). With Julius Caesar's calendar reform, September became the ninth month, with 30 days. September comes after August and before October.
An equinox occurs in September, either on the 22nd or 23rd, meaning there are days and nights of about equal length, half way between the June and December solstices. In the Northern Hemisphere, Autumn (Fall) begins in this month, while in the Southern Hemisphere, this is the beginning of Spring. For meteorologists, the people who study the weather, these seasons begin on September 1 in those hemispheres. In both hemispheres, it is the seasonal equivalent of March in the other. In most Northern Hemisphere countries, school starts in this month, following the summer holidays.
In Ancient Greece, September was called "Boedromion". The Anglo-Saxons called it "Gerstmonath", meaning "Barley month", referring to the harvest. In other countries, it is referred to as "Autumn Month", such as in Finland (Syyskuu) and German-speaking parts of Switzerland (Herbstmonat).
Ethiopian New Year occurs in September. Jewish New Year also often occurs in this month.

</doc>
<doc id="686" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=686" title="Sound">
Sound

We can define a sound wave as a disturbance which travels through some medium.
Sound is the term to describe what is heard when sound waves pass through a medium to the ear. All sounds are made by vibrations of molecules through which the sound travels. For instance, when a drum or a cymbal is struck, the object vibrates. These vibrations make air molecules move. Sound waves move away from their source (where they came from), traveling on the air molecules. When the vibrating air molecules reach our ears, the eardrum vibrates, too. The bones of the ear vibrate in the same way that of the object that started the sound wave. These vibrations let you hear different sounds. Even music is vibrations. Irregular vibrations are noise.
Sound waves are longitudinal waves with two parts: "compression" and "rarefaction". Compression is the part of the sound waves where the molecules of air are pushed ("compressed") together. Rarefaction is the part of the waves where the molecules are far away from each other. Sound waves are a sequence of compressions and rarefactions.
The speed of sound.
 relarticle mainpage">Main : Speed of sound
Sound waves can travel through solids, liquids, and gases, but it cannot travel through a vacuum (a place with nothing in it). This is why astronauts can not talk to each other in space: they need a radio to hear each other. Sound can travel through water faster than through air; and they travel even faster in solids like stone, iron, and steel. Sound travels at 335 metres (1,100 feet) per second in the air.
Pitch and Intensity.
"Pitch" is the highness or lowness of sound. Pitch is how humans hear different frequencies. Frequency is determined by the number of vibrations per second. The highest key on a piano, for instance, vibrates 4,000 times per second. It has a frequency of 4000 hertz (Hz), or 4 kilohertz (kHz). Lower keys have lower frequencies. A note an octave higher than another note has twice the frequency of that note. 
The intensity of a sound is how much sound energy goes through a square meter in one second. Sound waves with higher amplitude (bigger vibration) have higher intensity. The intensity of a sound is higher closer to the sound source. Farther away, it's less intense. The inverse square law shows how sound intensity becomes smaller, farther from the sound source. "Inverse square" says that when distance gets multiplied by a number, sound intensity gets divided by that number squared (the number times itself). Thus, twice the distance means a quarter the intensity. 
Sound intensities can be very different. They can range from 0.000000000001, which are barely heard, to 1 W/m2 (painfully loud). The decibel scale makes sound intensity numbers easier to work with. A 0.000000000001 W/m2 intensity is 0 dB (decibels). When the decibel number increases by 10, the intensity is ten times as much. So, a 1 W/m2 intensity is 120 dB.
Loudness is how people sense the intensity of sound. Loudness depends on sound intensity, sound frequency, and the person's hearing.
Heard and not seen.
Audible sound has frequencies between 20 Hz to 20 kHz. Human beings can hear audible sound. Sound waves with frequency above 20 kHz are called ultrasound waves. Sound waves with frequency below 20 Hz are called infrasound waves. Human beings cannot hear ultrasound waves and infrasound waves, but some animals, like bats and dolphins, use them. Older people have an even smaller hearing range. People are best at hearing sounds between 1000 Hz and 6000 Hz.
The Doppler Effect.
When a sound source is moving towards someone, the frequency seems to increase. The same thing happens when someone moves toward the sound source. Frequency seems to decrease when someone moves away from a sound source. It also seems to decrease when the sound source moves away from someone. This is the Doppler effect.
References.
Halpern, Alvin, Erich Erlbach (1998). "Beginning Physics II: Waves, Electromagnetism, Optics, and Modern Physics," pg. 50-56

</doc>
<doc id="689" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=689" title="Society">
Society

Society is the term to describe human beings together (collective, the sum of their social networks and power networks). It does not refer to everything everybody thinks or does, but only to those things that everybody acts upon – or refuses to do – quite reliably.
Because it must keep even the poorest and weakest members of a society willing to help even the richest and strongest, a society is very concerned with its citizenship, rights, ethics and time limits. These are basic ways to achieve fairness. If they break down badly, people will think the society is unfair and start taking things from each other, refusing to help each other, or seeing those who have more as cheats. 
While every society is different, the way it breaks down and fails is very often the same: fraud, theft, violence, war and sometimes even genocide if people stop identifying with the society and thus identify with what they think of as a "race" of people. A new society may be formed out of only those who still agree, or who just survive the collapse of an old failed one.
If the strength and unity of any society's members' willingness to help each other is to be measured, it is called social capital, because it substitutes for other forms of capital. One needs less money with more solidarity in society, because the collective substitutes for the currency. 
However, usually, the strength is not directly measured, but only assumed. People take risks that society will support them, without knowing for sure that it will. For instance, they may refuse to obey the law, and count on their fellow society members to free them in a jury or court of appeal.
A social contract sets out rules for this kind of cooperation. One kind of social contract is a constitution – which allows for a jury or court to decide that the law, not the person, is wrong, according to the society's rules.
Related pages.
 "This can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".</div >

</doc>
<doc id="690" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=690" title="Suggestion">
Suggestion

A suggestion is an idea that one suggests, or says is good for another (or others) to follow. Some people may agree to it, and some may disagree. If they disagree or have a different suggestion, the person who first suggested the idea will usually discuss with the other people and find a good conclusion that satisfies both and is good.
 "This can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".</div >

</doc>
<doc id="695" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=695" title="Spache Readability Formula">
Spache Readability Formula

Spache Readability Formula is one method of finding out how hard a piece of writing is (its textual difficulty).
The method compares words in a text to a list of words which are familiar in everyday writing. The words that are not on the list are called "unfamiliar". The number of words per sentence are counted. This number and the percentage of unfamiliar words is put into a formula. The result is a reading age. Someone of this age should be able to read the text.
Spache works best on texts that are for children under the age of eight.
the formula; (0.141 * average sentence length)+(0.086 * percentage of difficult words)+0.839 = grade level
According to Oleander Solutions (), the revised Spache Formula is:
 GL = (.121 * ASL) + (.082 *UW) + .659 
Where:
 GL = U.S. grade level
 ASL = Average sentence length
 UW = Number of unique unfamiliar words

</doc>
<doc id="699" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=699" title="Sport">
Sport

A sport is commonly defined as a sort of game that requires physical activity and involves a degree of competition as, for example, baseball, soccer, bowling, or basketball. Many people play sports with their friends. Sportsmen need coaches to teach or train teams or individuals how to do better. Sports can be played indoors or outdoors and by individuals or teams.
Some people like to watch other people play sports. Those who watch others playing sports are called "fans". While some fans watch sports on television, others actually go to stadiums or other places where people pay to watch them in person. These fans are called "spectators".
At present, there is a great variety of sports available, for example:

</doc>
<doc id="700" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=700" title="Science">
Science

Science is what we do to find out about the natural world. It is the total of physics, chemistry, biology, geology and astronomy. Science makes use of mathematics, and it makes observations and experiments. Science produces accurate facts, scientific laws and theories. 'Science' also refers to the large amount of knowledge that has been found using this process.
Research uses the scientific method. Scientific research uses hypotheses based on ideas or earlier knowledge. Then those hypotheses are tested by experiments. 
People who study and research science and try to find out everything about it are called scientists. Scientists study things by looking at them very carefully, by measuring them, and by doing experiments and tests. Scientists try to explain why things act the way they do, and predict what will happen.
Scientific method.
Today, "science" usually refers to a way of pursuing knowledge, not just the knowledge itself. It is mainly about the phenomena of the material world. In the 17th and 18th centuries scientists increasingly sought to formulate knowledge in terms of "laws of nature" such as Newton's laws of motion. And over the course of the 19th century, the word "science" became increasingly associated with the scientific method itself, as a way to study the natural world, including physics, chemistry, geology and biology. 
It is in the 19th century also that the term "scientist" was created by William Whewell. He meant it to distinguish those who sought knowledge on nature from those who sought other types of knowledge.
The scientific method is the name given to the methods used by scientists to find knowledge. The main features of the scientific method are:
Other features of science.
Not everyone completely agrees about how science works. Some philosophers and scientists say that scientific theories are only accepted for the time being. They last so long as they are the best explanation. When theories no longer explain the data, they are discarded and replaced. Or, sometimes scientists will make a theory better rather than discard it, or that they will keep on using the theory hoping that it will be made better eventually.
Science is a way to get knowledge by discarding what is not true. 
Scientists must be very careful to make explanations that fit well with what they observe and measure. They compete to provide better explanations. An explanation might be interesting or pleasing, but if it does not agree with what other scientists really see and measure, they will try to find a better explanation.
Before a scientific article is published, other scientists read the article and decide whether the explanations make sense from the data. This is called peer review. After articles are published, other scientists will also check if the same experiments, observations or tests produce the same data again. Peer review and repeating experiments are the only way to be sure the knowledge is correct. 
Science makes models of nature, models of our universe, and medicine. There are many different sciences with their own names. However it is not right to say "science says" any one thing. Science is a process, not just the facts and rules believed at one time.

</doc>
<doc id="702" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=702" title="Saint Lawrence River">
Saint Lawrence River

Coordinates: 
The Saint Lawrence River (French: "fleuve Saint-Laurent" 
 
The river drains water from the Great Lakes into the Atlantic Ocean. It is more than three thousand kilometres long. The river meets the Atlantic Ocean in a big "estuary" or bay, the biggest in the world; this is called the Gulf of Saint Lawrence.
The Canadian cities of Kingston, Montreal, Trois-Rivières and Quebec City are on this river. It is very important because ships can sail up the river and through the Great Lakes right into the middle of North America. It is the third largest river in Canada.
Other websites.
 "This about a  can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="703" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=703" title="Seville">
Seville

Seville (Spanish: "Sevilla" 
 
) is a big city in the South of Spain, in Europe. A big river called the Guadalquivir River which goes through Seville.
The city of Seville is the capital of the Spanish region called Andalusia and of the province of Sevilla. The people who live in the city are called "Sevillanos" and there are almost a million of them: 700,000.
History.
A very old story says that the city was started by the famous hero of Greece, named Hercules. The Romans when they came to Spain gave it the Latin name of Hispalis. Over time this changed to be spelled in English as "Seville". The Arab Moors took the city when they invaded the country, and you can still see a lot of the buildings they built during their 800 year stay in Spain (711-1492).
In 1992 Seville was the place for the Expo 92. There is a beautiful bridge across the Guadalquivir River called "Puente del Alamillo". It was thought up by Santiago Calatrava a famous building expert.
Seville is famous for its hot summer weather.
Sports.
Seville is the home town of two soccer teams, Sevilla FC (often simply called "El Sevilla") and Real Betis Balompié (often called "El Betis").

</doc>
<doc id="708" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=708" title="Salami">
Salami

Salami is a sausage that first came from Italy. The name comes from the Italian salare meaning to make something salty.
The original salami was made from a mix of chopped pork and salt which was dried using air in a casing. People who are Muslim are not allowed to eat this type of salami because it is pork. Now there are many types of salamis made in some countries. Nearly all are seasoned with a combination of herbs and spices in addition to salt. Salamis are now sometimes smoked or cooked before air drying. Some kinds are made of beef while others mix beef and pork. Most, if not all Italian salamis have garlic in them, but few German kinds do, for example. Some, like a few salamis from Spain, include paprika or chili. The difference between some types is in how coarse or fine the meat is chopped. Some "light" salami might add turkey or chicken to reduce both fat and calories.
Many salamis are named after the city or region where they come from. Some examples are Arles, Genoese, Hungarian, and Milano salamis.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
<doc id="709" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=709" title="Special English">
Special English

Special English is a simple form of the English language. It is used by a public radio station called Voice of America, run by the United States government in Special English programs every day. Its news and feature programs are read more slowly than usual, using fewer English words and simple grammar. 
The contents of Special English programs are much easier to understand. Special English is clearer and simpler, and it uses shorter sentences. It can also help someone whose English is weak to improve his or her English. In some countries, for example China, Special English is popular among people learning English.
Special English was first used on October 19, 1959.
Other websites.
 "This can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".</div >

</doc>
<doc id="710" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=710" title="Sausage">
Sausage

Sausage is a food made of ground-up or chopped-up meat. It often has spices in it and is covered in a casing. Other meats, like the hot dog, pepperoni, bologna, and salami also are covered with a casing like a sausage's.
Sausages often have meat from the animal's head, lips, cheeks, ears and other parts. Some have blood in them. Irish and English sausages normally have a lot of "rusk," or bread crumbs, and they are less meaty than sausages from other countries.
Sausages may be used as a meal, in a sandwich, or in other foods like stews.
Many countries and regions have special kinds of sausage. Sausages are some of the oldest foods.
Other websites.
 Media related to at Wikimedia Commons

</doc>
<doc id="717" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=717" title="Slang">
Slang

Slang are words that are informal. Usually each generation or social group has its own slang - for example, older people can have trouble understanding the slang of younger people. On the other hand, younger people often understand, but find silly or old-fashioned, the slang of older people.
Over time, language tends to get more complex, since new words enter much faster than old words leave. Over time, slang almost always becomes part of the language, and approved for use by all.
It has also happened that some words used in Anglo-Saxon for bodily functions became thought of as profanity or rude after they were replaced by Latinate words like "urinate", "defecate" and "copulate" - which polite people were supposed to use after the Norman conquest of England in 1066. This was in part a way of making poor people (who spoke Anglo-Saxon) all appear to be rude, while more powerful people (who spoke Norman) appeared to be polite - one way that etiquette can develop, and reinforce power structure. This is only one example from history of how racism can be a reason for defining one group's language as 'slang' and another as 'correct'.
Wanting to have rules of grammar that do not change and the same vocabulary used by everyone for better communication is another reason that is often given for defining one group's language as correct.
An "idiom" can be slang, but it can also be a metaphor that becomes part of the culture.
Two examples of slang are 'wassup' and 'dunnoe'. 'Wassup' usually means 'What is up?' (as in, 'How are you?'), and 'dunnow' usually means 'I don't know'.

</doc>
<doc id="725" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=725" title="Social contract">
Social contract

A social contract is an agreement between the people of a state and the government of a state. The people agree to follow certain rules made by the government. These rules are usually called laws. Laws help to make sure people have rights and that their rights are taken care of. One kind of social contract is a constitution. A constitution sets limits on the powers of government leaders, police, and other people who have authority.
The first social contracts were written by philosophers such as John Locke and Jean-Jacques Rousseau. They saw good government as coming from social contracts. Rousseau wrote a book called "The Social Contract". Both the United States Declaration of Independence and United States Constitution are social contracts.
 "This can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".</div >

</doc>
<doc id="726" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=726" title="Social capital">
Social capital

Social capital is the willingness of people to help each other. 
It often replaces money which people would use to buy the same help.
Society works best when there is plenty of social capital. The less social capital there is, the more social problems there usually are. If there is no social capital, war and revolution often results.
People who have no money and cannot get help from society may have to agree to do things they do not want to do, or force others to do things they do not want to. Organized crime grows in this way, and so do forced labour and slavery.
Most ways of measuring social capital have to do with trust - people who trust that favours and help will be available when they need it will favour and help others more. Those who are seen as trying to get a free ride will get much less help. A social climber tries to earn social capital by making friends with those who have it but without actually helping. Some call this kind of person a social parasite. They are very hard to detect, unlike people who cheat or commit fraud. When there are too many of these kinds of people, especially when they are politicians, people begin to [ mistrust] their government. Rather than work with a political party to change law, they may start to look for direct revenge for things. 
Social capital is a lot like real capital. The more money a person or a society has, the easier it is to do things and the better off people are. The less money, the more difficult things become and the worse people feel.

</doc>
<doc id="732" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=732" title="Site">
Site

A site is a real fixed physical location where something will or has happened or a place where something is. 
Uses.
Uses in buildings.
It is used very often in building trades to mean the place where a building will go up. 
Uses in gravesites.
A gravesite is a place where a person will be buried after they die. 
Uses in work.
The words onsite and offsite refer to work that must take place on the site, or which can take place somewhere else. For instance, a prefabricated building can be "built offsite" and then "moved onsite".
Use on the internet.
"Site" is also a common abbreviation in net jargon for "website". In this case no real physical location exists other than the place where the computers are, and one "goes to the site" simply by using a web browser to "go to" that URL. This is a conceptual metaphor. It can be confusing. Someone who uses it is also likely using other jargon.
 
 

</doc>
<doc id="733" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=733" title="Subtraction">
Subtraction

Subtraction is the arithmetic operation for finding the difference between two numbers. The special names of the numbers in a subtraction expression are, minuend - subtrahend = difference. The expression 7 - 4 = 3 can be spoken as "seven minus four equals three," "seven take away four leaves three," or "four from seven leaves three."
If the minuend is less than the subtrahend, the difference will be a negative number. For example, 17 - 25 = ( -8 ). We can say this as, "Seventeen minus twenty-five equals negative eight." This is how cash registers determine the change you receive when you pay with more money than your purchase costs. 
Related pages.
 "This about can be made longer. You can help Wikipedia by [ adding to it]".

</doc>
